Source: LING324 Lecture 4 - Conceptual Metaphor.pdf
================================================================================

--- Page 1 ---
LING324 Cognitive Linguistics
Professor Christopher Hart
Lecture 4: Conceptual Metaphor

--- Page 2 ---
Overview•Classical accounts
•Literal first hypothesis
•Conceptual metaphor theory
•Domains and mappings
•Relations and entailments
•Invariance
•Highlighting and hiding
•Experiential grounding
•Multimodal metaphor
2

--- Page 3 ---
Classical Accounts
•Metaphor a matter of words
•Literary and rhetorical functions
•Emotion rather than reason
•Exceptional rather than ordinary
3An application of an alien name by 
transference (Aristotle, Poetics , ca. 350 BC)
All the artificial and figurative applications of words 
eloquence hath invented, are for nothing else than to 
insinuate wrong ideas, move the passions, and 
thereby mislead the judgement; and so indeed are 
perfect cheats (Locke 1690: 508)
“But soft, what light through 
yonder window breaks? It is the 
east, and Juliet is the sun!” 
(Romeo & Juliet, William Shakespeare) 

--- Page 4 ---
Literal First Hypothesis
•Addressee computes literal interpretation
•Rejects it on plausibility grounds
•Assumes speaker cooperating 
•Subsequently searches for possible 
alternative meanings
•Settles on most likely intended meaning
4
John Searle
Paul Grice

--- Page 5 ---
Conceptual Metaphor Theory
•Metaphor a matter of thought (and 
action)
•Important reasoning device
•Reflected in ‘everyday’ language
•Highly conventionalised
•Conceptual metaphors accessed 
directly by metaphorical expressions
•Evidenced by systematicity  found in 
metaphoric expressions
•Not necessarily of X is Y form
5metaphor is not just a matter of language, that 
is, of mere words … [O]n the contrary, human 
thought processes  are largely metaphorical … 
[T]he human conceptual system is 
metaphorically structured and defined. (Lakoff & 
Johnson 1980: 6)
the essence of metaphor is understanding 
and experiencing one thing in terms of 
another” (Lakoff and Johnson 1980: 5)

--- Page 6 ---
Conceptual Metaphor Theory
a.Your claims are indefensible
b.He attacked  every weak point in my argument
c.His criticisms were right on target
d.I demolished  his argument
e.I’ve never won an argument with him
f.You disagree? Okay, shoot !
g.If you use that strategy , he’ll wipe you out
h.He shot down  all of my arguments
(Lakoff and Johnson 1980: 4)
6

--- Page 7 ---
Domains and Mappings
•At cognitive level, metaphor involves 
mapping  from elements in a source 
domain (SD) onto elements in a 
target domain  (TD)
•TD inherits conceptual structure 
from SD
•SD provides template for thinking, 
feeling and acting with respect to TD
•Domains structured by frames  and 
image schemas
7


--- Page 8 ---
Domains and Mappings
•ARGUMENT  IS WAR
8Fighting parties
Attacking
Weapons
Defending
SurrenderingParticipants in 
argument
Expressing alternative 
standpoint
Justifications
Maintaining 
standpoint
Giving up standpoint
WAR ARGUMENT

--- Page 9 ---
Domains and Mappings
•SDs concrete, familiar areas of 
experience:
•E.g. HUMAN  BODY , PLANTS , ANIMALS , 
FOOD , FORCES
•TDs more abstract and otherwise 
underspecified areas of experience
•E.g. EMOTION , MORALITY , THOUGHT , 
RELATIONSHIPS , TIME
•Mappings unidirectional
9


--- Page 10 ---
Domains and Mappings
a.Our relationship has hit a dead end
b.We’re going through a rough patch
c.Look how far we’ve come
d.We’re at a crossroads in our relationship
e.We may have to go our separate ways
f.This relationship isn’t going anywhere
g.We’re spinning our wheels
h.Their marriage is on the rocks
(Lakoff 1993: 206 -7)
10


--- Page 11 ---
Domains and Mappings
a.That makes my blood boil
b.I had reached boiling point
c.Simmer down!
d.Let him stew  for a while
e.I was fuming
f.I felt the anger rising inside me
g.I needed to let off some steam
h.He flipped his lid
i.I hit the roof
j.He bottled up his anger for a long time
11
(Lakoff 1987: 387; see also Kövecses  2003)

--- Page 12 ---
Relations and Entailments
•Ontological  relations
•Held between corresponding elements in SD 
and TD
•Epistemological  relations
•Held between elements in SD
•Transferred to corresponding elements in TD
•Produce metaphoric  entailments
•Implications and inferences arising from 
metaphoric mapping
•E.g. If time is money, and money is a finite 
resource, then it follows that time is also a 
finite resource
12


--- Page 13 ---
Relations and Entailments
•You’re wasting  my time
•This gadget will save you hours
•I don’t have  the time to give you
•How do you spend  you’re time these days
•That flat tyre cost me an hour
•I don’t have enough  time to spare  for that
•Is that worth  your while?
•He’s living on borrowed  time
(Lakoff & Johnson 1980: 8)
13

--- Page 14 ---
Invariance
•Partial mapping; not all aspects of SD 
mapped 
•Only aspects compatible with TD and in 
way consistent with organisation of TD
•Invariance Principle – “constraints on 
fixed correspondences” (Lakoff 1993: 215)
•Entailments incompatible with TD 
blocked – TD Override
14Metaphorical mappings preserve the 
cognitive topology (that is, the image schema 
structure) of the source domain, in a way 
consistent with the inherent structure of the 
target domain. (Lakoff 1993: 215)
a.Ivy gave Wilbur a book and he kept it
b.Ivy gave Wilbur a minute and he kept it

--- Page 15 ---
Highlighting and Hiding
•Partial mapping leads to highlighting  and 
hiding  effects
•Framing power of metaphor in social 
domains (e.g. Thibodeau & Boroditsky 2011) 
15
“In allowing us to focus on one aspect of a concept 
(e.g. the battling aspects of arguing), a metaphorical 
concept can keep us from focusing on other aspects of 
the concept that are inconsistent with the metaphor 
(Lakoff and Johnson 1980: 10)

--- Page 16 ---
Experiential Grounding
•Motivation: resemblance  vs correlation  (Grady 1999)
•Primary metaphors (Grady 1997) emerge through correlations of subjective 
mental and sensorimotor experience 
•E.g. QUANTITY  IS ELEVATION
•Other orientational  metaphors
•Link concepts that are equally basic or familiar where both directly 
perceived or experienced 
•Foundational and atomic – building blocks of compound  metaphors
•E.g. EVENT  STRUCTURE  metaphor
16

--- Page 17 ---
Experiential Grounding
•QUANTITY  IS SIZE/ELEVATION
•My child has a huge  amount of toys
•Only a tiny number of people showed up
•The price of shares is going up
•Interest rates are falling
•Quantity and size/elevation correlated 
in everyday experience
•When quantity increases, so does 
mass and evaluation
17


--- Page 18 ---
Experiential Grounding
•Orientational  metaphors  organise whole system of concepts with respect to 
spatial schemas (e.g. UP/DOWN )
18HAPPY  IS UP; SAD IS DOWN
I’m feeling  up.  That boosted  my spirits .  My spirits  rose.  Thinking  about  her gives  me a lift.  I’m feeling  down .  He’s really  low 
these  days.  I fell into a depressions .  My spirits  sank.
Physical  basis : drooping  posture  typically  accompanies  sadness  and depression  while  erect  posture  accompanies  positive  
emotional  states  
CONSCIOUS  IS UP; UNCONSCIOUS  IS DOWN
He woke up.  He rises  early in the morning.  He fell asleep.  He dropped  off to sleep.  He’s under  hypnosis.  He sank into a coma.
Physical basis: Humans and most other mammals sleep lying down and stand up when they awaken.
HEALTH  AND LIFE ARE UP; SICKNESS  AND DEATH  ARE DOWN
He’s at the peak  of health.  He’s in top shape.  He fell ill.  He’s sinking  fast.  He came down  with the flu.  His health is declining .  
He dropped  dead.
Physical basis: Serious illness forces us to lie down.  When you’re dead you’re physically down.

--- Page 19 ---
Experiential Grounding
19AFFECTION  IS WARMTH Subjective judgement: Affection
Sensorimotor domain: Temperature
Example: They gave me a warm  welcome
Basis: Feeling warm while being held affectionately
INTIMACY  IS CLOSENESS Subjective judgement: Intimacy
Sensorimotor domain: Proximity in space
Example: We’ve been close  for years but we’re drifting apart
Basis: Being physically close to people you’re intimate with
SIMILARITY  IS CLOSENESS Subjective judgement: Similarity
Sensorimotor domain: Proximity in space
Example: They bear a close  resemblance to one another
Basis: Observing similar objects clustered together
CONTROL  IS UP Subjective judgement: Being in control
Sensorimotor domain: Vertical orientation
Example: I’m on top of the situation
Basis: Easier to exert control over object from above
UNDERSTANDING  IS GRASPING Subjective judgement: Comprehension
Sensorimotor domain: Object manipulation
Example: I finally grasped the idea
Basis: Obtaining information about an object by handling it

--- Page 20 ---
Experiential Grounding
•Event -Structure metaphor
•Complex metaphor comprising multiple 
primary metaphors
•Aspects of event -structure ( STATES , 
CHANGES , PROCESSES , ACTIONS , CAUSES , 
PURPOSES , MEANS ) conceptualised in terms 
of SPACE , FORCE  and MOTION
•Generalises over wide range of more 
specific metaphors (e.g. RELATIONSHIPS  ARE 
A JOURNEY  or A CAREER  IS A JOURNEY )
•Inheritance hierarchies
20Metaphor
ExampleSTATES  ARE LOCATIONS  (BOUNDED  REGIONS  IN SPACE )
    John is in love
Metaphor
ExampleCHANGE  IS MOTION  (FROM  ONE LOCATION  TO ANOTHER )
    Things went from bad to worse
Metaphor
ExampleCAUSES  ARE FORCES
    Her argument forced me to change my mind
Metaphor
ExampleACTIONS  ARE SELF-PROPELLED  MOVEMENTS
    We are moving forward with the new project
Metaphor
ExamplePURPOSES  ARE DESTINATIONS
    We’ve finally reached the end of the project
Metaphor
ExampleMEANS  ARE PATHS  (TO DESTINATIONS )
    We completed the project via an unconventional route
Metaphor
ExampleDIFFICULTIES  ARE IMPEDIMENTS  TO MOTION
    It’s been uphill all the way on this project

--- Page 21 ---
TIME  IS SPACE
•Time conceptualised as motion through space
•Primary metaphor – time and motion correlated 
in experience
•In forward motion, posterior locations associated 
with past time and anterior locations associated 
with future time
21Time is not conceptualised on its own terms, but rather is 
conceptualised in significant part metaphorically and 
metonymically (Lakoff & Johnson 1999: 137)


--- Page 22 ---
TIME  IS SPACE
•Time Orientation metaphor
a. He has a good future ahead  of him
b. In the weeks ahead  of us
c. I’m looking forward  to Christmas
d. The past is behind  us now
e. It’s no good looking backwards , we must 
focus on what is in front  of us now
•Not the same across all 
languages! (e.g. Núñez  & 
Sweetser 2006)
22
Source domain: SPACE Target domain: TIME
Observer’s location Present
Space in front of observer Future
Space behind observer Past

--- Page 23 ---
TIME  IS SPACE
•Moving Time vs. Moving Ego
•Moving Time: Events in time 
move toward and past 
observer
a.Christmas is getting closer and 
closer
b.The time for action has arrived
c.Those days have long since passed
23Source domain: SPACE Target domain: TIME
Objects Times / Temporal events
Motion of objects past observer ‘Passage’ of time
Proximity of objects to observer Imminence of temporal event
FUTURE PRESENT PAST

--- Page 24 ---
Source domain: SPACE Target domain: TIME
Locations on observer’s path Times / temporal events
Motion of the observer ‘Passage’ of time
Distance moved by observer Amount of time ‘passed’
Distance of observer from location Temporal ‘distance’ of event
Rapidity of motion of observer Imminence of event’s occurrenceTIME  IS SPACE
•Moving Time vs. Moving Ego
•Moving Ego: Observer moves 
toward and past events in 
time
a.We’re getting  closer  to Christmas
b.We’ve come  to a point in time 
where action is required
c.We’ve moved on since then
24
FUTURE PRESENT PAST

--- Page 25 ---
Multimodal Metaphor
•Metaphor primarily a matter of thought and only 
derivatively of language (Lakoff & Johnson 1980: 
153)
•Follows that metaphor “should be capable of 
assuming non -verbal and multimodal 
manifestations as well as […] purely verbal ones” 
(Forceville 2002: 2)
•Non-verbal and multimodal specimens required to 
validate claims of CMT
•Found in texts like adverts and cartoons (Forceville 
1996; Forceville & Urios -Aparisi  2009) 
25


--- Page 26 ---
Thank
youSelected References
Forceville, C. (1996). Pictorial Metaphor in Advertising.  Routledge.
Forceville, C. (2002). The identification of target and source in pictorial 
metaphors. Journal of Pragmatics 34: 1 -14.
Forceville, C. and Urios -Aparisi , E. (ed.) (2009). Multimodal Metaphor . Mouton.
Grady, J. (1999). A typology of motivation for conceptual metaphor: Correlation 
vs. resemblance. In G. Steen and R. Gibbs (eds.), Metaphor in Cognitive 
Linguistics . Amsterdam: John Benjamins . pp.79 -100.
Kövecses , Z. (2003). Metaphor and Emotion.  Cambridge University Press.
Lakoff, G. (1993). The contemporary theory of metaphor. In A. Ortony  (ed.), 
Metaphor and Thought,  2nd edn. Cambridge University Press. pp.202 -251.
Lakoff, G. and Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors We Live By. University of Chicago 
Press.
Lakoff, G. and Johnson, M. (1999). Philosophy in the Flesh: The Embodied Mind 
and Its Challenge to Western Thought. Basic Books.
Núñez , R. & Sweetser, E. (2006). With the future behind them: Convergent 
evidence from Aymara language and gesture in the crosslinguistic 
comparison of spatial construals of time. Cognitive Science  30: 401 -450.
Thibodeau, P . and Boroditsky, L. (2011). Metaphors we think with: The role of 
metaphor in reasoning. PLoS  ONE  6 (2): e16782.
