Source: ferris1995.pdf
================================================================================

--- Page 1 ---
This article was downloaded by: [American Public University System]
On: 11 February 2014, At: 05:35
Publisher: Routledge
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number:
1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street,
London W1T 3JH, UK
Intelligence and National
Security
Publication details, including instructions for
authors and subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/fint20
Clausewitz, intelligence,
uncertainty and the art
of command in military
operations
John Ferris a & Michael I. Handel b
a Professor in the Department of History , The
University of Calgary ,
b Professor of Strategy , The US Naval War
College , Newport, RI
Published online: 02 Jan 2008.
To cite this article:  John Ferris & Michael I. Handel (1995) Clausewitz,
intelligence, uncertainty and the art of command in military operations,
Intelligence and National Security, 10:1, 1-58, DOI: 10.1080/02684529508432286
To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/02684529508432286
PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE
Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all
the information (the “Content”) contained in the publications on our
platform. However, Taylor & Francis, our agents, and our licensors
make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy,
completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions
and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of
the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis.

--- Page 2 ---
The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be
independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor and
Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings,
demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever
or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in
relation to or arising out of the use of the Content.
This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study
purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution,
reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any
form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms & Conditions of access
and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-
conditions
Downloaded by [American Public University System] at 05:35 11 February 2014 


--- Page 3 ---
Clausewitz, Intelligence, Uncertainty and
the Art of Command in Military
Operations
JOHN FERRIS AND MICHAEL I. HANDEL
This article explores the connections between intelligence, the conduct
of military operations and the art of command. First, it examines this
phenomenon in the period before the industrial revolution and
the development of real-time communications, particularly as it was
reflected in the influential arguments of Carl von Clausewitz. It also
examines how far his ideas on intelligence and uncertainty shaped his
theory of military operations. Second, the article studies the relation-
ship between intelligence, operations and command in the modern
period. For this purpose, it rests on a mature case study: Edward Drea's
account of the use and misuse of intelligence in the Pacific War by
General Douglas James MacArthur. Finally, the article considers the
relationship between intelligence, operations and command in
the future. It links together such issues as one general's use of Ultra and
the interrelationship between intelligence, uncertainty and command in
one war, and in the theory of war; it uses Clausewitz to illuminate a
campaign and vice versa. The article cannot expand on every point it
mentioned, but the hope is to provide a conceptual framework which
may assist in their further development.
INTELLIGENCE AND MILITARY OPERATIONS
Any examination of intelligence and war must begin with Clausewitz's
arguments about uncertainty and the psychology of command. Such a
discussion may also illuminate those ideas which are fundamental to
modern theories of war. The limits to this approach must be emphasized
from the start, for both war and On War are complex matters. The
discussion will therefore focus only on certain variables, excluding
related issues such as technology, doctrine and politics.
Clausewitz believed that 'At the moment of battle, information about
the strength of the enrimy is uncertain, and the estimate of one's own is
usually unrealistic'.1'The inability to collect accurate, relevant and
complete data about the battlefield, and on one's own forces no less than
on the enemy, was fundamental to Clausewitz's view that war lies within
Intelligence and National Security, Vol.10, No.1 (January 1995), pp.1-58
PUBLISHED BY FRANK CASS, LONDON
Downloaded by [American Public University System] at 05:35 11 February 2014 


--- Page 4 ---
2 INTELLIGENCE AND NATIONAL SECURITY
'the realm of uncertainty . . . the realm of chance'. These views about
intelligence were axiomatic but not simplistic. Clausewitz was referring
not to man's ability to know the world but to a commander's ability to
understand a battle. He was a practical man writing for practical men,
through generalizations drawn from his own experience and study. He
matured in a military environment where accurate operational intelli-
gence was difficult to acquire, while rumors in battle were rife, where
many important factors (perhaps most of them) were known to be
unknown, where slow and unreliable communications systems rendered
originally correct information inaccurate by the time it was received or,
indeed, prevented it from ever being transmitted at all.
In the short period of time available to act on the battlefield, the
command, communication and intelligence services of his era could not
provide clear, consistent and accurate information. A general could not
know the facts about operations that he needed to know when he
needed to know them. He could not know the enemy or the battle:
therefore he would have to act without knowledge.
From these specific circumstances Clausewitz derived universal gener-
alizations, which were accurate for his time but not necessarily for ours.
He concluded that
Many intelligence reports in war are contradictory; even more are
false and most are uncertain . . . most intelligence is false, and the
effect of fear is to multiply lies and inaccuracies. As a rule most
men would rather believe bad news than good, and rather tend to
exaggerate the bad news. The dangers that are reported may soon,
like waves, subside; but like waves they keep recurring, without
apparent reason.
In these circumstances, more intelligence reports make 'us more, not
less uncertain'.2 As will be shown, that observation remains true even
today, though the nature of the uncertainty has changed.
Some of this analysis was commonplace - soldiers had often empha-
sized the limited value of intelligence. Xenophon, for example, wrote
that 'in time of war enemies often form designs on one another but
seldom know the state of things among the party against whom their
designs are formed. Therefore there is nothing other that can give
counsel in such a case but the gods. They know all things and give signs
to whomever they please by sacrifices, omens, voices and dreams'.3
Since his time, bureaucracy has replaced the gods. Clausewitz, more-
over, focused essentially on the operational level during war and it is
this plane, rather than that of strategy, to which the comments in this
article pertain. Clausewitz assumed that commanders should usually
Downloaded by [American Public University System] at 05:35 11 February 2014 


--- Page 5 ---
CLAUSEWITZ, INTELLIGENCE, UNCERTAINTY AND COMMAND 3
possess accurate intelligence about strategic issues, especially before
war broke out. This, incidentally, explains why Clausewitz thought that
strategic surprise was a good idea in theory but extremely difficult to
execute in practice. "The movement of the enemy's columns into battle
can be ascertained only by actual observation . . . but the direction from
which he threatens our country will usually be announced in the press
before a single shot is fired.' 'But uncertainty decreases the greater the
distance between strategy and tactics; and it practically disappears in
that area of strategy that borders on the political.'4 Similarly, whereas
Clausewitz concluded that boldness was fundamental to operations, he
specifically denied that it had the same place in strategy.
Qausewitz's views on operational intelligence were not simple, nor
were they absolutely accurate, as shown by the experience of at least
one contemporary. Devoting much personal attention to the task, the
Duke of Wellington demonstrated that it was possible to collect useful
tactical and operational intelligence on the enemy. A small but notable
minority of British and American generals of that era adopted a similar
view. From an examination of the same base of data as Clausewitz, the
Baron de Jomini drew different conclusions about operational intelli-
gence, and, over 2,000 years earlier, the influential Chinese strategist
Sun Tzu praised - in fact, exaggerated - the military value of intelli-
gence.5 None the less, Clausewitz offered a powerful generalization
about the effect of operational intelligence before the modern era, and
these views were central to his theory. To Clausewitz, the lack of sure,
current and effective intelligence causes uncertainty to dominate the
field of battle, the psychology of command and the art of war. This is a
major factor underlying the 'friction' which distorts all attempts to act
on intentions in the operational sphere. So deeply do these ideas on
ignorance and uncertainty shape his logic and his theory of command
and war that amendments to them automatically force one to reconsider
Clausewitz's arguments from the start. In fact, if these variables were to
be assigned new values, then Clausewitz's equations would produce new
solutions. This is true of Clausewitz's view that deliberate deception is
almost always useless in war while intentional strategic surprise can
rarely be achieved;6 true, by extension, of even more fundamental
matters, such as Clausewitz's belief that uncertainty and friction
together prevent commanders from achieving precisely intended results
precisely as intended; and true of his emphasis on intuition and
determination in thought, and on boldness in operations, his theories of
understanding, command and action.
According to Clausewitz, few men function well amidst the uncer-
tainty and ignorance, the friction and danger, of the battlefield. That
Downloaded by [American Public University System] at 05:35 11 February 2014 


--- Page 6 ---
4 INTELLIGENCE AND NATIONAL SECURITY
environment can be mastered only by the 'military genius', a man with
'a very highly developed mental aptitude for a particular occupation',
war. This figure combines the faculties which 'taken together, constitute
the essence of military genius. We have said in combination, since it is
precisely the essence of military genius that it does not consist in a single
appropriate gift - courage, for example - while other qualities of mind
or temperament are wanting or not suited to war'.7 Gifts of character,
thought and action fuse into one to form the military genius. While
pedantry - Clausewitz's favourite word of denigration - killed com-
mand, other intellectual powers gave it life. War 'cannot be waged
except by men of outstanding intellect',8 possessing 'a special type of
mind ... a strong rather than a brilliant one',9 with 'a sensitive and
discriminating judgement ... a skilled intelligence to scent out the
truth'10 and presence of mind, the ability to respond quickly and
competently to the unexpected.
When assessing the personal characteristics of commanders, Clause-
witz used the language of ideal types and the logic of the golden mean,
recognizing that either the lack or the predominance of any one
characteristic could be costly and that desirable characteristics were
linked on a spectrum to undesirable ones. Thus, carried too far,
determination could 'degenerate into obstinacy'.11 Moreover, he was
never dogmatic: to every 'rule' or 'principle' he describes, he immedia-
tely notes the exception or the limitation. None the less, two faculties in
particular were the bedrock of military genius. Strength of character, the
'ability to keep one's head at times of exceptional stress and violent
emotion', allowed the reason of the commander to dominate his
passions without destroying their drive.12 Equally fundamental was
determination - a willingness to 'stand like a rock',13 to act on belief
despite uncertainty, to hold to a consistent course of action amid
confusion. Clausewitz commended the consistent pursuit even of an
inferior course of action. He understood the old principle: order,
counterorder, brings disorder. 'The role of determination is to limit the
agonies of doubt and the perils of hesitation when the motives for action
are inadequate . . . when a man has adequate grounds for action -
whether subjective or objective, valid or false - he cannot properly be
called "determined". This would amount to putting oneself in his
position and weighing the scale with a doubt that he never felt.'14
Determination 'is engendered only by a mental act; the mind tells man
that boldness is required, and thus gives direction to his will. This
particular cast of mind, which employs the fear of wavering and
hesitating to suppress all other fears, is the force that makes strong men
determined.'15 Determination (in Clausewitz's sense) alone could
Downloaded by [American Public University System] at 05:35 11 February 2014 


--- Page 7 ---
CLAUSEWITZ, INTELLIGENCE, UNCERTAINTY AND COMMAND 5
prevent action from being paralysed by uncertainty and the delays and
hesitation caused by thought.
The mind of the military genius combined reason and intuition - 'an
intellect that, even in the darkest hour, retains some glimmerings of the
inner light which leads to truth ... the quick recognition of a truth that
the mind would ordinarily miss or would perceive only after long study
and reflection'.16 It combined thought and temperament into one whole
greater than its parts. 'Knowledge must be so absorbed into the mind
that it almost ceases to exist in a separate, objective way . . . Continual
change and the need to respond to it compels the commander to carry
the whole intellectual apparatus of his knowledge within him ... By
total assimiliation with his mind and life, the commander';; knowledge
must be transformed into a genuine capacity.'17 Clausewitz's statement
that 'all great commanders have acted on instinct'18 refers to this union
of thought and temperament, which might be termed informed intui-
tion. This faculty of coup d'oeil alone can master uncertainty and
ignorance, and understand the battlefield.
Circumstances vary so enormously in war, and are so indefinable,
that a vast array of factors has to be appreciated - mostly in the
light of probabilities alone. The man responsible for evaluating the
whole must bring to his task the quality of intuition that perceives
the truth at every point. Otherwise a chaos of opinions and
considerations would arise, and fatally entangle judgement. Bona-
parte rightly said in this connection that many of the decisions
faced by the commander-in-chief resemble mathematical problems
worthy of the gifts of a Newton or an Euler.19
In the dreadful presence of suffering and danger, emotion can
easily overwhelm intellectual conviction, and in this psychological
fog it is so hard to form clear and complete insights that changes of
view become more understandable and excusable. Action can
never be based on anything firmer than instinct, a sensing of the
truth. Nowhere, in consequence, are differences of opinion as
acute as in war, and fresh opinions never cease to batter at one's
convictions. No degree of calm can provide enough protection:
new impressions are too powerful, too vivid, and always assault
the emotions as well as the intellect.
Only those general principles and attitudes that result from a
clear and deep understanding can provide a comprehensive guide
to action. It is to these that opinions on specific problems should
be anchored. The difficulty is to hold fast on to these results of
contemplation in the torrent of events and new opinions. Often
Downloaded by [American Public University System] at 05:35 11 February 2014 


--- Page 8 ---
6 INTELLIGENCE AND NATIONAL SECURITY
there is a gap between principles and actual events that cannot
always be bridged by a succession of logical deductions. Then a
measure of self-confidence is needed, and a degree of skepticism is
also salutary. Frequently nothing short of an imperative principle
will suffice, which is not part of the immediate thought-processes,
but dominates it: that principle is in all doubtful cases to stick to
one's first opinion and to refuse to change unless forced to do so by
a clear conviction. A strong faith in the overriding truth of tested
principles is needed; the vividness of transient impressions must
not make us forget that such truth as they contain is of a lesser
stamp.20
INTELLIGENCE AND RISK-TAKING
This is the background to Clausewitz's art of war, the means by which
the intelligent commander without intelligence should function in con-
ditions of uncertainty. Boldness is central to this theory of operations.
... In what field of human activity is boldness more at home than
in war? . . . boldness in war has its own prerogatives. It must be
granted a certain power over and above successful calculations
involving space, time, and magnitude of forces, for wherever it is
superior, it will take advantage of its opponent's weakness. In
other words, it is a genuinely creative force.
To Clausewitz, 'a distinguished commander without boldness is
unthinkable. No man who is not born bold can play such a role, and
therefore we consider this quality the first prerequisite of the great
military leader'.21
Daring was valuable because it made commanders act and because,
when they did act on its dictates, it multiplied all the conditions of
uncertainty which frightened their opponents. In fact, a bold com-
mander tended to create timid enemies - his own confidence thrusting
the burden of uncertainty onto the foe. While, in Clausewitz's view, a
general might never be able to increase his own certainty, his boldness
would heighten the enemy's uncertainty and thus indirectly compensate
for his own limited intelligence. These observations remain true for all
wars. Two hostile commanders stand at the opposite ends not only of
the field of battle but also of a balance of uncertainty and an equilibrium
of intelligence. This relationship is relative - by increasing the enemy's
uncertainty, you decrease your own - and complex'. Even when the
quality of intelligence is better than assumed by Clausewitz, pursuit of
an unexpected and high-risk strategy can still upset the balance of
uncertainty; indeed, the subjective certainty engendered in a com
Downloaded by [American Public University System] at 05:35 11 February 2014 


--- Page 9 ---
CLAUSEWITZ, INTELLIGENCE, UNCERTAINTY AND COMMAND 7
mander's mind by better intelligence may actually increase his oppo-
nent's chances to achieve success through an unexpected strategy.
Daring also maximized one's chances to surprise the enemy in general
and even to surprise him in a specific way through deliberate intent.
Clausewitz held that this was impossible to do on the strategic or
strategic/operational levels but could be achieved at the operational or
operational/tactical levels through a combination of boldness, determi-
nation, creative imagination and intellect. 'Only the commander who
imposes his will can take the enemy by surprise; and in order to impose
his will he must act correctly.'22 Today, of course, the reverse is true -
given such reliable and widespread devices as radar, complete surprise is
almost impossible to achieve at the operational level and almost
impossible to avoid at the strategic level.23
Scarcity multiplied the value of boldness. To Clausewitz, audacity is
less dangerous in commanders than caution and less frequently found.
'Given the same amount of intelligence [in a commander], timidity will
do a thousand times more damage in war than audacity'; 'a general
cannot be too bold in his plans, provided that he is in full command of
his senses, and only sets himself aims that he himself is convinced he can
achieve'; 'We always have the choice between the most audacious and
the most careful solution. Some people think that the art of war always
advises the latter. That assumption is false. If the theory does advise
anything, it is the nature of war to advise the most decisive, that is, the
most audacious'; 'boldness grows less common in the higher ranks'; 'no
case is more common than that of the officer whose energy declines as
he rises in rank and fills positions that are beyond his abilities.'24 In
Clausewitz's equation, uncertainty and its psychological consequences
reduce the frequency of boldness among commanders and increase the
value of this scarce commodity on the field of battle. If all commanders
were aggressive risk-takers, this characteristic would define the military
art but it would no longer offer a comparative advantage to any general.
When most commanders are cautious, then audacity is at a premium. In
a world of risk-takers, the deliberately cautious man is king.
Yet boldness in itself is merely a matter of animal spirit and is inferior
to temperament guided by reason. The few generals who combine these
characteristics are the greatest of military geniuses.
Boldness governed by superior intellect is the mark of the hero.
This kind of boldness does not consist in defying the natural order
of things and in crudely offending the laws of probability; it is
rather a matter of energetically supporting that higher form of
analysis by which genius arrives at a decision; rapid, only partly
Downloaded by [American Public University System] at 05:35 11 February 2014 


--- Page 10 ---
8 INTELLIGENCE AND NATIONAL SECURITY
conscious weighing of the possibilities. Boldness can lend wings to
intellect and insight; the stronger the wings, then, the greater the
heights, the wider the view, and the better the results; though a
greater prize, of course, involves greater risks.25
In the most desperate of hours, when material strength cannot prevail,
the day may yet be saved by a commander who unifies 'boldness and
cunning'26 (not intellect but 'secret purpose', a combination of intuition
and practical knowledge).
Clausewitz also noted a third combination of temperament and
reason, one pointing away from the others and also from all of his own
generalizations regarding the psychology of command. Caution was
generally produced not by choice but by character, by an instinctive
reaction to uncertainty. Worst-case analysis, he argued, was the natural
response to the unknown. 'Men are always more inclined to pitch their
estimate of the enemy's intentions too high than too low, such is human
nature.'27 Sometimes, however, caution was the deliberate decision of a
superior or cunning intellect. This unusual combination of character-
istics was the most balanced, the most powerful of them all.
Whenever boldness confronts timidity, it is likely to be the winner,
because timidity in itself implies a loss of equilibrium. Boldness
will be at a disadvantage only in an encounter with deliberate
caution, which may be considered bold in its own right, and is
certainly just as powerful and effective; but such cases are rare.
Timidity is the root of prudence in the majority of men.28
Certain dimensions of Clausewitz's arguments concerning 'boldness'
and 'caution' merit careful attention. His main tool for analysis and
synthesis was the ideal type method. He distilled complex issues into
their basic components and developed his concepts by posing simple and
often extreme or contradictory statements against each other. Hence, if
one takes any statement out of context, one distorts his entire argument.
The context for his discussion of 'boldness' and 'caution' is Book Three
of On War, which defines the general phenomena that shape strategy as
a whole. Here Clausewitz uses a conceptual model of the relationship
between moral and mental qualities, and explains how all of these
matters affect generalship as a whole. Not surprisingly, given this
context, he treats commanders as if they possess one and only one
psychological characteristic. They are 'all bold' rather than a mixture of
characteristics, such as 'mostly bold with a shade of caution'. He also
discusses the military effect of these psychological traits in the abstract,
that is, how the characteristics of 'boldness' or 'caution' are
Downloaded by [American Public University System] at 05:35 11 February 2014 


--- Page 11 ---
CLAUSEWITZ, INTELLIGENCE, UNCERTAINTY AND COMMAND 9
affected by and affect the condition of 'uncertainty'. His generals are
avatars of an ideal type rather than human beings. Clausewitz does not
discuss in precise historical terms how the relative 'caution' or 'boldness'
of one commander fighting another works in specific circumstances.
Indeed, no doubt he would have regarded this point as pedantic, since
he considered these characteristics to be absolute rather than relative;
that is, one is either bold or not, and when comparing two audacious
commanders the point is not that one is more daring than the other, but
that both are daring. Given his concerns and his level of analysis, it was
reasonable for Clausewitz to adopt such a means of assessment, but
commentators must take care in transferring his generalizations about
psychological characteristics to their own assessments of specific com-
manders. What is true of ideal types need not be true of individuals,
especially not when, as will be shown below, 'uncertainty' - the central
component in his theory - is open to revision.
Nor is it ever easy to define psychological characteristics such as
'boldness'. Are they determined by a general's behaviour - his usual or
universal practices when selecting options - or by his essential and
innate temperament? In any case, few commanders always behave in
what is commonly regarded as an 'audacious' or 'cautious' manner. In
the Second World War, for example, Rommel was daring in the desert
but not at Normandy. Montgomery usually adopted a deliberately
cautious approach, but he veered occasionally toward both daring and
timidity. The behavior of most commanders fluctuates within a given
range on the spectrum between these traits.
Above all, confusion arises from terminology. In common usage,
'boldness' is defined by such words as 'aggression' and 'high risk' and is
identified with field commanders like Rommel. This is not Clausewitz's
usage - or, more precisely, not his only usage. He defines daring by
reference not to a few specific sorts of behavior but to the ability to act
in an unexpected fashion. Under his usage, if everyone were to follow a
mindless cult of the attack, then the risk-taker would be reckless, while
the truly bold commander might be the one who turns to a carefully
calculated defensive battle. This is especially true because he defines
defense rather than any form of attack as being the strongest from of
war. Clausewitz, of course, did not regard such circumstances as the
general rule. In practice he usually did associate boldness on the
battlefield with aggressive and high-risk actions. None the less, paradox-
ical as it might seem, in the Clausewitzian sense 'boldness' could
sometimes be defined by such words as 'caution' and 'calculation', if
used in a creative or unexpected way. To Clausewitz, Fabius Maximus
or Pericles would be 'audacious' - indeed, Montgomery at Alam el-
Downloaded by [American Public University System] at 05:35 11 February 2014 


--- Page 12 ---
10 INTELLIGENCE AND NATIONAL SECURITY
Haifa might have seemed a bolder commander than Rommel, by daring
to use the tactics of 1918 against those of 1940, in an unexpected fashion
and with unexpected success.
For example, Clausewitz defines deliberate caution as being 'bold in
its own right', presumably because, in his theory, this stems from the
same combination of thought and temperament which produces 'bold-
ness governed by superior intellect'. In another context, Clausewitz
emphasizes that 'when a man has adequate grounds for action - whether
subjectively or objectively, valid or false - he cannot properly be called
"determined" '.29The same logic can be applied to 'caution' or 'daring':
the more adequate the grounds for action, or the greater the degree of
certainty, the less significant the effect of psychological characteristics
on decisions. To Clausewitz, daring is essential in circumstances of
uncertainty, where it substitutes for lack of strength or intelligence. If,
however, one possesses accurate and usable intelligence on the enemy
as well as greater strength, then what seems to be a bold action by
common usage would simply be an act of calculation in Clausewitz's
teminology - a calculated risk. In such circumstances calculation can
replace boldness. If perfect intelligence could be acquired on the
operational plane, daring would be no more relevant to a commander
than it is to a chess player choosing whether or not to sacrifice a piece.
Little daring is required to bet on a sure thing, little caution to avoid
certain destruction. Intelligence can turn caution into daring, and daring
into calculation. One must not confuse a calculated action with a boid
one, nor take aggression for audacity.
Hereafter we will refer to the common usage of 'boldness' with the
phrase 'aggressive risk-taking', as distinct from 'boldness (in Clausew-
itz's sense)'. At different times, the analysis will focus on two distinct
issues - how intelligence affects (a) the range of behavior of specific
commanders on the spectrum between 'caution' and 'boldness' and (b)
the relative value on the battlefield of these psychological characteristics
as ideal types, in the age of accurate and real time intelligence.
It is on the foundation of uncertainty that Clausewitz formulated his
definition of the ideal general's psychological characteristics and all his
normative rules for command - especially the 'imperative principle' ('in
all doubtful cases to stick to one's first opinion and refuse to change
unless forced by a clear conviction') and the value of boldness. Only the
'harmonious combination of elements', which make up 'the essence of
military genius - in particular, daring, determination and informed
intuition - can ward off the psychological threat of uncertainty. 'With
uncertainty in one scale, courage and self-confidence must be thrown
into the other to correct the balance.'30
Downloaded by [American Public University System] at 05:35 11 February 2014 


--- Page 13 ---
CLAUSEWITZ, INTELLIGENCE, UNCERTAINTY AND COMMAND 11
During this century, however, changes in the status of intelligence
have at times eroded - though not ended - the reign of uncertainty over
the field of battle. Ultra and uncertainty may represent the opposite
poles of a commander's understanding in war. This is not to say that
Ultra represents perfect knowledge, but rather the closest approxima-
tion to perfect and usable knowledge that commanders can expect to
receive. How has this affected the validity of the Clausewitzian para-
digm? How has increased knowledge affected the psychology of com-
mand, the art of war, the qualities required for military genius and the
relative value of caution and boldness? If intelligence provides
'adequate grounds' for action, what significance do daring and determi-
nation (in Clausewitz's sense) retain? Any answers to these questions
must take three general points into account.
First, intelligence does not produce command decisions, a com-
mander does. His personality, attitude toward risk, and military
education are therefore the most important factors in the use of
intelligence and the practice of operations.
Second, the greater the influence of Clausewitz's analysis of the
psychology of war and the more widely accepted his prescriptions for
handling it, the less their accuracy. Clausewitz defined the means to
manage uncertainty without reducing its scale, particularly through
determination in the mind of the commander and boldness in his deeds.
In the century and a quarter following his death his theory had mixed
fortunes, but his prescriptions regarding these specific characteristics
were influential, largely because they fitted with those of other authori-
ties and with the lessons which officers intuitively derived from the
Napoleonic and Nelsonic experience.31 Many armies, pre-eminently
those of Germany, Japan and France before 1914, did follow his
prescriptions, in a vulgarized fashion; simultaneously, the Nelsonic
tradition affected the British, German, Japanese and American navies
in a similar way.
John Keegan has recently argued that Clausewitz's views are irrele-
vant to historians because they have never influenced soldiers.32 One
might as well argue that Newton has never influenced a gunner. Nor can
Keegan's view survive contact with primary documents. The writings of
several American generals of the Second World War, for example, are
permeated with both pure and vulgarized forms of Clausewitz. Consider
George S. Patton's lecture of 1926 on 'victory':
War is an art and as such is not susceptible of explanation by fixed
formulae . . . War (is) . . . violent simplicity in execution (and)
pale and uninspired on paper . . . Insist on: Maximum distances;
Downloaded by [American Public University System] at 05:35 11 February 2014 


--- Page 14 ---
12 INTELLIGENCE AND NATIONAL SECURITY
BOLDNESS; Prompt and accurate reports. Speed is more import-
ant than the lives of the (men at the) point. THE ENEMY IS AS
IGNORANT AS YOU . . . You must not be delayed by blufs
[sic]. Bluf [sic] yourself ... BE BOLD . . . YOU ARE NOT
BEATEN UNTIL YOU ADMIT IT, Hence DON'T ... The
'Fog of war' works both ways. The Enemy is as much in the dark as
you are. BE BOLD!!! [sic].
Similarly, in 1943 Patton wrote:' Never take counsel of your fears. The
enemy is more worried than you are. Numerical superiority, while
useful, is not vital to successful offensive action. The fact that you are
attacking induces the enemy to believe that you are stronger than he is
... IN CASE OF DOUBT, ATTACK.' Even Dwight Eisenhower
insisted that instructors should
treat war as the drama that it is rather than constantly reducing it
to a science of marching tables and tonnage calculations. I do not
decry the necessity for the scientific end of the education, I merely
think that too many officers develop their thinking more and more
along lines of mathematical calculations rather than realizing that
calculations always go wrong.
Many generals constantly think of battle in terms of, first,
concentration, supply, maintenance, replacement, and, second,
after all the above is arranged, a conservative advance. This type
of person is necessary because he prevents one from courting
disaster. But occasions arise when one has to remember that under
particular conditions, boldness is ten times as important as
numbers.33
None of this proves a direct connection between Clausewitz's ideas and
these commanders' actions, but it does show that they explained their
views in Clausewitzian language. Until Keegan can come to terms with
the evidence, his assertions are useless.34
Generals, of course, were not Clausewitzians in a conscious sense. In
taking fractions of his argument out of context and placing them in the
context of the Napoleonic tradition, soldiers turned his precepts on their
heads - thus, Clausewitz's insistence on the importance of determi-
nation was used to defend obstinacy, his arguments about boldness
influenced a mindless cult of the offensive, his idea of the military genius
was used to justify the idea of the commander as a great man - or dictator.
The point is simply the effect of this vulgarized variant of Clausewitz.
While boldness (in Clausewitz's sense) remained as rare in this century as
ever, aggressive risk-taking did become more common among com-
manders than usual. In principle, as aggressive and high-risk behavior on
Downloaded by [American Public University System] at 05:35 11 February 2014 


--- Page 15 ---
CLAUSEWITZ, INTELLIGENCE, UNCERTAINTY AND COMMAND 13
the battlefield becomes more common, it changes the context which
defines its own value: the more numerous the aggressive risk-takers, the
less the advantage offered by that characteristic. The same is true of
determination (in Clausewitz's sense). Increasingly, as aggressive risk-
takers fight each other, both will lose the operational benefits stemming
solely from this characteristic: indeed, the least aggressive of them
might have the advantage. The more common aggressive risk-taking
becomes, moreover, the more other (and temperamentally cautious)
commanders will be forced to find a counter to it, and the more they will
succeed in doing so. For commanders on the battlefield, psychological
characteristics do not have an absolute value but one defined relative to
those of their adversaries. With an increase in aggressive risk-taking,
other commanders are given an incentive - an imperative - to anticipate
then to minimize its potential advantages. Thus, one might conclude, as
a direct result of his observation, empirically based and tolerably
accurate, that aggressive risk-taking tended to become less effective
than Clausewitz predicted and caution, though not timidity, more so.
Third, many commentators, merging Clausewitz, the cavalry spirit
and the notion of 'Great Captains', have treated aspects of war such as
boldness of command and skill in maneuver as though these were
universally the most - perhaps, the only - fundamental prerequisites for
victory. The following points apply not to Clausewitz but to views
common among modern commentators. This view is most commonly
attached to the influential ideas of Basil Liddell Hart although many
other military commentators have expressed views. George S. Patton
also spoke of the 'Great Captains' and 'the immortal line of might
warriors'.35 Exponents of such ideas have tended to view war in
romantic terms (as a form of art) and to adopt such beliefs as the idea
that mobile operations must represent a higher form of the operational
art than set-piece battles. Although Clausewitz himself despised this
approach, it is particularly pronounced among members of the romantic
school of military history, with their adulation of the romantic school of
military commanders, especially in its German form. They involve
several fallacies. These views fall prey to the idea of the 'master cause':
in effect, they treat just a few of the many factors involved in a process
as being the only necessary - and therefore sufficient - causes for it. As a
result, certain factors are overemphasized while others, perhaps equally
important, are treated as passive conditions and therefore forgotten.36 The
views in question, moreover, are ahistorical. The role of each individual
aspect of command and military prowess varies with time and place. There
is no universal value for any one of these characteristics nor any constant
basket of weights for the whole: the importance of all these matters
Downloaded by [American Public University System] at 05:35 11 February 2014 


--- Page 16 ---
14 INTELLIGENCE AND NATIONAL SECURITY
varies from one period to another. Ipso facto, this is also true of the
characteristics of any individual commander. Furthermore, one
common means used to determine the nature and the value of these
characteristics - the comparison of commanders across the ages and the
pursuit of the 'Great Captain' - is useful as a heuristic device but fatally
misleading when applied as a precise and meaningful tool of analysis.
'Great Captains' are not people, they are a Platonic ideal - a way of
gauging the quality of individual commanders. This ideal, in turn, rests
on implicit assumptions about the universal value of specific military
characteristics; that is, intellectual presuppositions are smuggled into an
analysis and then uncovered as empirically demonstrated conclusions.
Certain military qualities are fetishized, while others are ignored,
without any rigorous justification being offered for this selection of
values, then certain commanders are treated as archetypes for these
allegedly universal qualities, as if Hannibal's characteristics would have
automatically made him master of the western front. While a historical
record demonstrates the usual (though not universal) inferiority of a
Bliicher to a Bonaparte, how can one meaningfully compare two
contemporaries who never fought each other, let alone commanders
from different epochs; and from these hypothetical comparisons, how
can one derive lessons regarding the universal value of any single
characteristic of command or of war?
These issues of theory can be illuminated through a study of the war
fought by Douglas MacArthur and his lieutenants against powerful but
ignorant Japanese enemies, who, instead of using intelligence to control
uncertainty, relied on a vulgarized version of the Clausewitzian art of
war, combined with selected traditions from their own warfare. These
conclusions can be compared with Allied experiences in Europe
between 1942-45 against a German enemy with similar characteristics.
This intelligence record will provide a mirror for generals and general-
ship: by comparing what a given officer believed with his actions one can
reconstruct his calculus of military actions and his nature as a com-
mander.
ULTRA IN THE PACIFIC
Seven months in the Pacific produced two of the most celebrated events
in the history of intelligence. While ample attention has been paid to the
role of codebreaking in the United States' disaster at Pearl Harbor and
its triumph at Midway, the studies of Ultra (or 'special intelligence', as
American officers more commonly called it) in any other part of the
Pacific war have been limited in quantity and quality. A bridge has now
Downloaded by [American Public University System] at 05:35 11 February 2014 


--- Page 17 ---
CLAUSEWITZ, INTELLIGENCE, UNCERTAINTY AND COMMAND 15
been thrown across this gap in scholarship. The primary strength of
MacArthur's Ultra, Codebreaking and the War Against Japan, 1942-
1945yi is Edward Drea's analysis of how one source of intelligence
worked how it fitted in with the rest, how the material which it produced
was assessed and used by commanders in a single theater and how all of
this affected the course of one campaign. The evidence on these issues is
better than usual in the study of military intelligence and Edward Drea
has mined it with energy and craft. Drea, a master of the American
records on MacArthur's campaigns, has also utilized the surviving
Japanese documents with unprecedented thoroughness. MacArthur's
Ultra possesses greater analytical sophistication and covers more chro-
nological terrain than the best previous accounts of intelligence during
the Pacific war (and good ones, the works of Gordon W. Prange, et
al.).3S It is entirely superior in analysis, synthesis and research to lesser
but still useful studies, such as those by John Costello, Edwin Layton,
Ronald Spector and Ronald Lewin. Drea's sober and multi-causal
account is far from the speculation, sensationalism and exaggeration of
the role of intelligence which mar so many studies such as those by
Ladislas Farago and James Rusbridger, and even those of Lewin and
Costello.39 Drea does not stretch evidence, misquote it, invent it or
ignore it, nor does he ever forget that intelligence alone can never win a
war. On the other hand, he demonstrates that Ultra was the decisive
source of intelligence in the southwest Pacific, one which fundamentally
shaped the course of the Pacific war.
MacArthur's Ultra is essential on two counts. It is the first serious
study of signals intelligence in the southwest Pacific theater and it is the
best single study of that campaign as a whole. While Edward Drea is far
from ignorant of the practice of intelligence, he is not a specialist in its
study. Thus, he is immune to the ills specialists suffer, particularly the
tendency to exaggerate the significance of intelligence. Drea's analysis
of the technical aspects of the topic - the communication and crypto-
graphic systems of the Imperial Japanese Army and Navy (IJA and
UN), the techniques by which Allied cryptanalysts attacked these codes
and the process by which the product was distributed, analysed and
utilized - is useful to the expert while comprehensible to the common
reader. His account of codebreaking organizations and the role of data-
processing machines as a cryptanalytical tool in the South West Pacific
Area Command (SWPAC) will particularly interest students of crypto-
logy. Nor does Drea overrate the role of codebreaking. He places it in
the context of all sources of information and he pays unusual attention
to often overlooked elements of signals intelligence, such as traffic
analysis. No other book about the Second World War explains with
Downloaded by [American Public University System] at 05:35 11 February 2014 


--- Page 18 ---
16 INTELLIGENCE AND NATIONAL SECURITY
more authority exactly what information was available to any Allied
commander and his staff on a daily basis and how this affected their
decisions. Few match the rigor with which Drea compares the causal
role of Ultra to that of its fellow factors - operational, logistical,
doctrinal, topographical, personal - in the shaping of events. This work
ranks alongside those of Ralph Bennett among the best, not to mention
the few, scholarly studies of signals intelligence during the Second
World War.40
Drea takes as his text the dictum of Bennett and F.H. Hinsley that
there was not one Ultra but several: that the role and importance of
special intelligence varied with time and theater. Certainly there were
fundamental differences between the Ultras of the Pacific and Europe,
for technical, tactical, organizational and political reasons. In Europe,
Ultra emanated from a centralized bureau controlled by one country,
which co-ordinated the attack on every code of two others. Codebreak-
ing against Japan was produced by several agencies of three allies
(Australia, Great Britain and the United States) working in a decentra-
lized fashion. The USN and the American Army ran separate organiza-
tions, each divided between autonomous bureaus in Washington and
the Pacific, while the cryptanalysts in Delhi had greater independence
than any other sub-section of British codebreaking. This frustrated
those at the time who held that only a centralized system could foster
efficient cryptanalysis and that frustration has shaped the historiography
of the period. It has led, in particular, to the claim that because SWPAC
sabotaged centralization, it must have abused Ultra.41 This may be true
but it has yet to be proven. Certainly the loose system of the Pacific met
the needs of the USN in 1942, while Drea argues that it always worked
for SWPAC. However effective in technical terms, this system had
obvious political consequences: it left ample room for bureaucratic
buccaneering. Nothing could have better suited MacArthur, a com-
mander of messianic self-confidence, a well-honed public relations
machine with remarkable political power, a desire for total sway over
his own sphere and the determination to control Allied strategy against
Japan. He had unique control over codebreaking in his theater
for 'Central Bureau', MacArthur's signals intelligence agency, was
never subsumed in the integrated Anglo-American cryptanalytical
system. This remained his private intelligence bureau, producing
MacArthur's Ultra for MacArthur's aims - to crush the foe and
influence his friends.
Drea, by implication, leaves his readers with the impression that
Ultra in Europe grew technically more successful and militarily more
useful in a steady, regular and virtually unbroken fashion as time went
Downloaded by [American Public University System] at 05:35 11 February 2014 


--- Page 19 ---
CLAUSEWITZ, INTELLIGENCE, UNCERTAINTY AND COMMAND 17
by. While this argument is tolerably accurate as a broad generalization
for the whole period 1939-45, it is not true of specific matters during
smaller periods of time, such as the campaigns in the Atlantic and in
Africa during 1940-43. The history of Ultra in these two theaters and in
the southwest Pacific is very similar, replete with sudden and complete
cryptanalytical successes or defeats and reversals of cryptological for-
tune - situations in which a total inability to penetrate one of the
enemy's cryptographic systems coincided with total access to others.
Moreover, in these campaigns technical achievements in cryptanalysis
and success on the field of battle were not linked in a simple linear
pattern. Arguably, in the Mediterranean campaign Ultra could have
been most useful when it was technically most primitive rather than
most mature, because of the prevailing strategic and operational
conditions. When it was most primitive, force-to-space ratios were low,
as were both sides' strengths; hence, victories with decisive conse-
quences were feasible. By the time that Ultra matured, both sides were
locked in a prolonged struggle of attrition.42 The differences between
the history of Ultra in Europe and the Pacific are not as stark and simple
as Drea suggests. They also exist in areas which are not discussed in his
formal and explicit analyses. In his formal explanations of the causes for
events, Drea appears to explain the differences between the effect of
Ultra in Europe and the Pacific primarily in terms of the technical
success of cryptanalytical bureaus and the personal predilections of
commanders. He does not always explicitly incorporate two other
factors: Ultra's limitations as a source of intelligence - what material it
could and could not provide - and the issue of how far such material
could and could not be used in distinct operational and strategic
circumstances. On the other hand, these matters are integrated impli-
citly into his narrative, and effectively so.
The history of Ultra in Europe and the Pacific also differed. In
Europe the sequence of events regarding Allied success against German
cryptographic systems was broadly similar, although the date at which
the process began varied significantly with the German service in
question. First came a period of limited and often fragmentary access to
specific Enigma keys, coupled with major problems in assessing such
material. Then followed a cryptanalytical breakthrough, which pro-
duced high-level material on a continual and current basis; finally,
analysts enjoyed a long period of mature exploitation, during which
they determined the main lines of the enemy's organization, drew
powerful conclusions about its operational intentions and precise ones
about its capabilities, and were almost always accurate about such
fundamental matters as the enemy's order of battle.
Downloaded by [American Public University System] at 05:35 11 February 2014 


--- Page 20 ---
18 INTELLIGENCE AND NATIONAL SECURITY
Little of this was true of the Pacific, although that theater was at first
glance ideally suited for signals intelligence. Forces were scattered over
millions of square miles, often lacking direct links by cable; hence radio
dominated communications. Prisoners of war and agents were less
effective sources of intelligence than usual while captured documents,
photo reconnaissance and signals intelligence were far more important
than usual. In the wireless war the Allies had two additional advantages:
the IJA and UN lacked sophisticated signals intelligence services and
placed immense faith in the formal security of their cryptographic
systems. The operational circumstances of the Pacific enhanced these
opportunities. (See Maps 1 and 2.) Force-to-space ratios were extraordi-
narily low. Most elements of both sides were rarely in direct contact
with the enemy; consequently the disposition, strength and intentions of
such forces were masked and difficult to calculate. Seldom has posses-
sion of the initiative carried such consequences. It was unusually
difficult to recover one's balance if struck by an unexpected blow -
weeks might be required to redeploy naval or air forces from one base to
another, months to build the infrastructure needed to maintain large
forces in a new area or to move soldiers by sea or land. The war in New
Guinea, in particular, was a sideshow in which neither side could easily
replace its losses. The destruction of 20,000 men or 200 airplanes or the
capture of one supply base could transform a campaign in a territory
with the geographical space of the Mediterranean theater. Operations in
New Guinea, for example, turned on the annihilation of forward
Japanese airbases in August 1943 and on the battles of the Bismarck Sea
and Hollandia, and in all of these absolute Japanese material losses
were quite small. The ability to concentrate strength against enemy
weakness, to catch the enemy by surprise and to profit from a
knowledge of enemy intentions was unusually great; this was doubly
true for that most risky and complex of military operations, amphibious
assaults. Such circumstances generally provide the greatest opportuni-
ties for success through signals intelligence.
Events did not work quite as might have been anticipated, because of
the IJA's organization and its cryptographic systems. The IJA and UN
relied on superenciphered codebooks, which were slower to use than
the machine cipher systems of the era. They were more labour-intensive
and unable to carry as heavy a load of traffic before coming cryptologi-
cally vulnerable, while the distribution of new books and tables was
dogged by difficulties; nevertheless, they were a perfectly good means of
defense if used with parsimony and skill. In practice, they were as secure
as the technically more sophisticated Enigma and Purple systems; at
least changes in superencipherment tables sometimes denied
Downloaded by [American Public University System] at 05:35 11 February 2014 


--- Page 21 ---
CLAUSEWITZ, INTELLIGENCE, UNCERTAINTY AND COMMAND 19
MAP 1
THE NEW GUINEA AND MEDITERRANEAN THEATERS COMPARED
Downloaded by [American Public University System] at 05:35 11 February 2014 


--- Page 22 ---
20 INTELLIGENCE AND NATIONAL SECURITY
MAP 2
THE MEDITERRANEAN AND WESTERN PACIFIC THEATERS COMPARED
Downloaded by [American Public University System] at 05:35 11 February 2014 


--- Page 23 ---
CLAUSEWITZ, INTELLIGENCE, UNCERTAINTY AND COMMAND 21
Allied cryptanalysts complete access to Japanese codes. Moreover,
these systems often were used with skill, if not always so. From early
1942 the UN's most important radio signals were more frequently read
by the enemy than not, although access might be lost for several weeks
at a time when codebooks or superencipherment tables were changed.
By December 1941, however, none of the IJA's systems had been
penetrated, and thereafter its security procedures were sound. They
were always better than the practices of the armies in Germany, Italy
and the Soviet Union and, until 1944, at least equal to those of the
American or British Commonwealth forces. There was one solitary if
crucial exception to that rule, the IJA's 'water transport' system, used
for army traffic about troop and logistical shipments by sea. This was
created in December 1942 and solved by Allied cryptanalysts four
months later.43
Thus the Allies had more or less complete mastery over all codes
regarding Japanese maritime matters. That was the fundamental prior-
ity in this genuinely combined services war, where the struggles on land,
sea and air were far less self-contained than in Europe. However, the
IJA's cryptographic systems for use within divisions (and sometimes
between garrisons and their immediate superiors) were the most secure
of any army of the entire Second World War. They were never once
solved. Admittedly, the elements within Japanese divisions needed
relatively little intercommunication by radio, given their operational
circumstances: had they been forced to signal to the degree required
under European conditions, either Japanese command within divisions
would have been strangled or the security of their codes would have
collapsed.44 The IJA had not found a general solution to the problem of
middle-grade cryptographic systems and communications within div-
isions, merely an effective solution to its own particular difficulties in
that sphere. Until January 1944, Western cryptanalysts also failed to
penetrate the superenciphered codebooks used for communication
between Japanese formations. Only when the Japanese 20th Division
failed to destroy its codebooks during a withdrawal in New Guinea did
the Americans finally break in, assisted by subsequent compromises of a
similar nature.45 As so often occurs, defeat on the field of battle crippled
signals and cryptographic security, and compromises of security fath-
ered operational catastrophes, in a vicious circle. None the less, for the
first half of the Pacific war, more signals intelligence about Japanese
land operations was acquired through cryptanalysis of naval than of
army traffic, just as at the same time solutions of Luftwaffe traffic were
the main source of Ultra on the German Army. Of all the Axis fighting
services the IJA, along with the German U-boat command, possessed
Downloaded by [American Public University System] at 05:35 11 February 2014 


--- Page 24 ---
22 INTELLIGENCE AND NATIONAL SECURITY
by far the hardest cryptographic shell. In both cases the nut cracked only
because the Allies acquired copies of the system, unbeknown to the
enemy. Hence, from the spring of 1942 Allied commanders in the
southwest Pacific could profit from traffic analysis against UN and IJA
stations, along with mastery of the UN's operational traffic, its 'water
transport' systems and, after April 1943, of the IJA's 'water transport'
systems. Until January 1944, however, rather late in the day, they had
no access to the IJA's operational traffic. After that date, material of
this sort flooded in.
Nor was that the only problem at hand. In both world wars, the
primary task of signals intelligence was to master the enemy's order of
battle, after which its capabilities were much easier to define and its
intentions less difficult to determine. This task was most readily
accomplished against an enemy with a predictable chain of command. It
was unusually difficult against the IJA because the success of signals
intelligence varies with the cultural, structural and doctrinal background
of the target. The IJA did not organize on the conventional Western
pattern. To a greater extent than any other army of the Second World
War, Japanese commands were established in the form of ad hoc task
forces, composed of a unique melange of units drawn from many
different formations, which were often designated only by the name of
their senior officer; elements of a single division were routinely
dispersed hundreds of miles from the others. The location of a given
German regiment normally indicated the presence of a specific division.
The strength of such forces usually could be calculated with a tolerable
degree of accuracy, and sometimes with extraordinary precision. This
was not true of the IJA nor of many non-Western armies during this
century, such as those of the Turks during the First World War and the
Iranians during the Gulf War of the 1980s.46 Structural links between
the IJA's units and formations were loose, by Western standards: the
identification of a given unit did not necessarily indicate anything about
any formation, or vice versa. When reconstructing the IJA's order of
battle, the basic building block was the battalion rather than the
division: this rendered reconstruction more difficult by an entire order
of magnitude. In 1937 the British Military Attache in Tokyo, F.S.G.
Piggott, who had controlled intelligence for the Second British Army
during the last phase of the great war wrote that 'it was easier to draw up
the German Order of Battle in France in 1918, than the Japanese Order
of Battle in China in 1937',47 This difficulty persisted in various forms
throughout the Pacific war. Until early 1944, the Allies had a surpris-
ingly limited grasp of the enemy's order of battle both in theaters and
garrisons. Then, through the break into IJA operational traffic and the
Downloaded by [American Public University System] at 05:35 11 February 2014 


--- Page 25 ---
CLAUSEWITZ, INTELLIGENCE, UNCERTAINTY AND COMMAND 23
difficult technical task of assessing 'address groups' (the elements within
any cryptographic system which identify the transmitter and recipient of
messages) Central Branch was able to determine the location, boundar-
ies and titles of all IJA headquarters, and therefore the disposition and
deployments of all its higher formations. Here, as ever, intelligence was
entirely irrelevant to grand strategy, and secondary in the formulation
of strategic objectives at the theater level - such issues are decided by
the interests of states and the attitudes of statesmen. The material from
Ultra, however, was sometimes fundamental to the execution of
theater-level strategy. It frequently guided the selection between and
the planning for major operations, and it was essential for the success of
the most effective operational options available to SWPAC, outflanking
or bypassing. At the same time, however, it was too imprecise to meet
many critical operational needs, such as uncovering with certainty the
strength and composition of specific commands.
Compared with the norm with signals intelligence, Ultra in the south-
west Pacific was unusually effective in tracing enemy intentions but
surprisingly unsuccessful in determining its capabilities - usually an
easier task. Compared with its peak in Europe, Ultra in the Pacific
never achieved complete mastery over the enemy's order of battle.
After accounting for these differences, the two were roughly equal as
sources of strategic intelligence and had A roughly comparable effect on
strategy and the planning of major operations. The situation was more
complex at lower levels of war. Compared with western Europe, Ultra
in the southwest Pacific was generally a less thorough and accurate
source of operational intelligence, but conditions on the battlefield
allowed intelligence more easily to shape dramatic operations. There-
fore, in the South-West Pacific, Ultra of technically lesser quality
contributed to operational triumphs which matched anything in Europe.
In the Pacific, Ultra's greatest value lay in addressing the issues of how
to execute lines of strategy and where (or where not) to begin major
operations. Once direct contact was established with the enemy,
however, most information was acquired through tactical means in
which the Allies had no particular advantages, which meant that the
balance of intelligence between the IJA and the Americans moved
toward equality.
These characteristics stemmed not merely from Japanese crypto-
graphic and military-bureaucratic systems, but from the nature of Ultra
and of intelligence assessment at SWPAC. Ultra was the most sophisti-
cated source of intelligence during the Second World War, bu| It was
never perfect and not always the best. Ultra took words straight from
the enemy's mouth, but those words were not always straightforward.
Downloaded by [American Public University System] at 05:35 11 February 2014 


--- Page 26 ---
24 INTELLIGENCE AND NATIONAL SECURITY
As Ralph Bennett has written: 'Ultra always told the truth, but not
always the whole truth.'48 Ultra's output fell between two poles, one
best described by words such as 'transparent' and 'self-evident' and the
other by terms like 'opaque' and 'ambiguous'. The meaning of messages
of the first type seemed to be intuitively clear compared with the
framework of common sense, as when an enemy commander outlined
his imminent intentions, or his quartermaster defined their order of
battle, or a convoy signalled its location. In all such cases, the nature
of the content was intuitively self-evident. Conversely, the content of
traffic of the second type was, in itself, ambiguous — its meaning could
be determined only through formal and frequently elaborate analysis.
Fragmentary bits of intelligence about the enemy's dispositions and
order of battle, for example, often provide value only through the
derivation of inferences that can be acquired solely through the
application of a reasoned, but seemingly arbitrary and arcane, process.
The first sort of material is relatively easy to understand and trust and
use; the second is more problematic on all of these counts. MacArthur's
headquarters handled matter of the first kind very well but.not the
second. It could not master the higher level of analysis needed to exploit
such material, work which Bletchley Park and Allied commands in
Europe did so well. Hence, SWPAC's intelligence assessments were
flawed and often dismally bad.
In this sphere MacArthur's headquarters was the least successful and
among the least competent senior commands of the Western Allies.
Here the critics of SWPAC's use of Ultra find much ammunition. Drea
does not quite recognize the weakness of SWPAC's performance, but
close reading of his narrative proves the point. He describes a constant
pattern. SWPAC made effective use of unambiguous information, 'hot'
and 'hard', about enemy intentions and capabilities, while its assess-
ments of ambiguous material were mediocre to poor. In particular,
SWPAC misconstrued the enemy's strength and dispositions in its
planning before battle after battle. While such errors were most routine
and extreme during the first year of the war, they occurred even to its
end.
This stemmed primarily from the personality of MacArthur himself.
He was not the type of officer to encourage the objective analysis of
intelligence. He wished to see material which supported the aims he had
already defined and proved they were good. Anything else he would
ignore: nothing else could more easily be baked to suit his appetite than
ambiguous material. MacArthur defined the nature of his meals through
the selection of a cook who would always season his meals according to
his master's taste. His intelligence chief, General Charles Willoughby,
Downloaded by [American Public University System] at 05:35 11 February 2014 


--- Page 27 ---
CLAUSEWITZ, INTELLIGENCE, UNCERTAINTY AND COMMAND 25
was almost always significantly wrong whenever his data were not self-
evident and extraordinarily precise. Even then his estimates were
usually mediocre, with a few brilliant exceptions derived from self-
evident Ultra traffic, most notably before the attack on Hollandia in
1944. MacArthur once stated that there had been only three great
military intelligence chiefs in history 'and mine is not one of them'.49
This was an understatement: under MacArthur, Willoughby was argu-
ably one of the three worst intelligence chiefs of the Second World War.
It was also self-condemnation. Intelligence can only be as good as its
master. Enlightened and open-minded generals will always gain more
from it than will those who know what they want to be told and refuse to
hear anything else. Some men use lamp-posts for illumination, some
simply for support; and several subordinate headquarters under
MacArthur's command, American or Australian, did assess Ultra on
the IJA better than SWPAC.
MacArthur, Willoughby and other staff officers at SWPAC also failed
to understand the Japanese way of war, the strategic calculus which
determined what range of options Japanese commanders believed they
had and how they would choose among them. Drea does not systemati-
cally assess American preconceptions about Japan and its army and
their effect on American military operations (although few historians
are better suited to this task), nor does he entirely share the influential
views of John Dower on that topic.50 Drea does, however, demonstrate
that SWPAC's predictions of Japanese behavior rested on cultural and
military ethnocentrism, ignorance of the enemy's doctrine and the belief
that the enemy must act as Americans would in their place. Not
surprisingly, right to the end of the war, Japanese decisions continually
surprised SWPAC and many, although not all, of its subordinate
commanders. The Australian General Thomas Blarney and the Ameri-
can General Walter Krueger grasped the IJA's style of operations quite
well and that knowledge shaped their professional if unpublicized
operations against it. Ultra, which sometimes saved MacArthur from
the costs of such errors, was perhaps the only kind of intelligence
capable of overcoming the combination of ethnocentrism and mediocre
assessment at SWPAC as well as the unusual problems involved in
determining the enemy's capabilities. Thus Ultra may have been even
more crucial to MacArthur's success than Drea allows, yet he allows a
great deal.
In the Pacific war, the period between August 1942 and September
1943 was one of equilibrium and attrition between forces roughly equal
in quantity, quality and initiative. The build-up of Allied strength in
New Guinea and the Solomon Islands turned the forward edge of
Downloaded by [American Public University System] at 05:35 11 February 2014 


--- Page 28 ---
26 INTELLIGENCE AND NATIONAL SECURITY
Japanese conquest into the central battlefield of the Pacific war. The
operations in these areas cost Japan more than the United States. Japan
was less able to replace losses, because of its casualties in aircrafts,
pilots, transport vessels and soldiers substantially exceeded those of the
Allies, who used their forces with greater economy and effect. In this
campaign, the sources and targets of military power were armed men
and the means to keep them armed. Both sides strove to maintain large
forces in some of the least developed places between the poles, where
virtually no logistical infrastructure or networks of physical communica-
tions existed. In such a war and such an environment, the United States
held the strongest cards. Nowhere could it more thoroughly outmatch
Japan than in creating an entirely new system of military logistics and in
fighting a war of material attrition. Japan, conversely, had made
precisely the errors defined by Clausewitz:
Since the object of the attack is the possession of the enemy's
territory, it follows that the advance will continue until the
attacker's superiority is exhausted . . . What matters therefore is
to detect the culminating point of victory with discriminate
judgement.
One defense is ... not exactly like another, nor will defense
always enjoy the same degree of superiority over attack. In
particular this will be the case in a defense that follows directly the
exhaustion of an offensive - a defense whose theater of operations
is located at the apex of an offensive wedge thrust forward deep
into hostile territory ... a defense that is undertaken in the
framework of an offensive is weakened in all its key elements
51
Instead, expanding until it could go no further, Japan reached its level
of incompetence, where it fought with all its power and to the death.
The battlefields of New Guinea and the Solomon Islands were simply
too large and too far forward to suit its tiny logistical and transport
capabilities. With every mile added to the distance between the battles
and its main centers of power, Tokyo, Manila and Singapore, its
logistical problems multiplied and its lines of communication became
more exposed. Japan was fighting precisely the war which least suited its
material resources, a prolonged and costly battle of attrition beyond
easy reach of its supply system.
This drove Japan, as a matter of routine, to take great and often
costly risks, such as shipping divisions to the most forward ports under
its control, and into the maw of enemy air and naval strength, or
Downloaded by [American Public University System] at 05:35 11 February 2014 


--- Page 29 ---
CLAUSEWITZ, INTELLIGENCE, UNCERTAINTY AND COMMAND 27
operating hundreds of aircraft from the same base, all vulnerable to one
massive onslaught. Japan's fighting and logistical services entered a
vicious circle, which progressively weakened their ability to fight
anywhere at all. For as both sides strained their muscles to strangle one
another in New Guinea and the Solomon Islands, Allied forces began to
slash the exposed limbs of Japanese logistics. The southwest Pacific
witnessed a terrible campaign of maritime interdiction, rendered even
more deadly and one-sided by Japan's failure to retaliate in kind and its
incompetence in convoy escort. These engagements eroded still further
the relative ability of Japanese logistics to support a prolonged war of
attrition. By early 1944, exactly as the IJA adopted a strategy of human
(though not material) attrition. Japan had lost the naval and air strength
needed to back it. Japan was on the verge of losing any use from every
single soldier and ton of supplies on its forward defensive perimeter
from the Marshall Islands to Burma.
These American engagements also directly shaped operations: the
battle of the Bismarck Sea drowned not merely a division but any hope
for Japanese strategic intiative in New Guinea. Similarly, pre-emptive
airstrikes wrecked Japan's forward airbases on that island, largely
because" the Japanese had failed to develop an effective early warning
system for air defense or to use properly its few radar sets. This crippled
Japan's air performance and increased the scale of its aircraft losses.
Between August 1942 and February 1944 the great American victor-
ies in the Pacific lay in the war of attrition. No doubt some such success
would have occurred in a world without Ultra but, as Drea demon-
strates, in the world as it was these triumphs did rest on the foundation
of signals intelligence. As a result, small American forces were used
with optimum effect against their logistical and air targets. A few
hundred aircraft and a few dozen submarines on station did not have to
hunt tiny and elusive targets in an area of a million square miles. The
location, strength and intentions of those targets were known; little
American effort was wasted and few opportunities were missed. As the
generator of both the economy and the concentration of force, intelli-
gence came close to reducing uncertainty. It allowed precisely intended
actions to be executed precisely as intended. By ensuring that all
available American naval and air power would be used effectively
against the enemy, it turned aggressive risk-taking into calculated risk.
MacArthur's air force commander, General George Kenney, was no
better than SWPAC in dealing with ambiguous information. Yet Kenney
received vast amounts of 'hot' and 'hard' material from Ultra, which he
trusted and used in one of the most successful campaigns of interdiction
and the acquisition of air supremacy ever waged by any air force. Few
Downloaded by [American Public University System] at 05:35 11 February 2014 


--- Page 30 ---
28 INTELLIGENCE AND NATIONAL SECURITY
commanders have married intelligence so well to operations and with
such effect.
Events on the ground in New Guinea during 1942-43 took a different
form. Despite the breathtaking self-sacrifice of Japanese soldiers and
their formidable military qualities, the DA lost more men than the
Allies in every major engagement. Nor could it match Allied material
resources. On the tactical and operational levels, however, the IJA's
attacks often caught the Allies by surprise, making them fight in areas
where their advantages in material could not easily be deployed. When
on the defensive, the IJA forced the Allies to launch slow and costly
battles of attrition. All this offered Japan the chance for perpetual check
in New Guinea. If forced to fight on the IJA's terms, the limited
resources of SWPAC could do no more than slowly reconquer a
wilderness. This is exactly what happened during the middle game of
this campaign. Whether the Allies used their armies clumsily, as under
MacArthur in the summer of 1942, or with skill, as under Blarney in the
spring and summer of 1943, they were not pursuing a winning strategy.
Instead, they played directly into the IJA's policy of delay, human
attrition and the grinding of American will. Nor was Ultra of great value
in these operations. In technical terms, it was in a primitive state,
producing little material directly relevant to land operations - material
which, in any event, was difficult to interpret. It sometimes illuminated
the enemy's strategic redeployments to the theater but MacArthur's
armies (unlike his air forces) were in no position to act on that material.
Given the nature of the terrain and the naval and air balance between
the adversaries, Allied land forces had a limited range of options, all of
which led to a pattern of stereotyped operations along narrow and
predictable channels of advance. So long as this continued, SWPAC
could never take center-stage in American strategy nor could Ultra offer
more than marginal assistance on the field of battle.
At the turn of 1944 all of these things changed, for a brief but crucial
period, as did MacArthur as military commander. His record in the
Pacific before April 1944 and after November 1944 was mixed. On the
one hand, he evinced aggression, willpower, a gambler's instinct and a
flair for amphibious operations. Against that stood his penchants for
misreading enemy intentions, for issuing unrealistic orders and for
attacking directly where the enemy was strongest; his operations on
land, moreover, tended to become bogged down in battles of attrition, a
style of operations in which he was not gifted. Conversely, in mid-1944
MacArthur conducted an impressive campaign which turned his com-
mand from the periphery to the center of Allied strategy in the Pacific.
Not coincidentally, this occurred precisely when Ultra finally and
Downloaded by [American Public University System] at 05:35 11 February 2014 


--- Page 31 ---
CLAUSEWITZ, INTELLIGENCE, UNCERTAINTY AND COMMAND 29
suddenly penetrated into the IJA's operational traffic. That was a
necessary cause for MacArthur's successes, but it was not a sufficient
one. The side with superior intelligence also possessed greater military
power and favorable opportunities to fight a war of maneuver. The war
of attrition had gutted Japanese naval and air resources, the bulwarks
needed to brace its defense perimeters against major blows. American
military power heavily outweighed that of Japan in quantity and quality,
while the breaching of the Bismarck barrier and the cracking of the
shield of the Marshall Islands opened a 1,000-mile line of sea room for a
campaign of maneuver toward Japan's inner defense perimeter. On
New Guinea the IJA remained formidable, with roughly as many
soldiers as SWPAC possessed, but it was strong in only a few locations
along a 1,000-mile coastline. Elsewhere it was not merely weak but
almost literally non-existent. Its logistical structure consisted of one
major supply centre and a handful of small ones, linked by coastal
shipping and portage on human backs through roadless bush. This
system could sustain the forward crust of the IJA against the heaviest
direct thrust which SWPAC could launch, but just one deep and heavy
amphibious blow might shatter it beyond hope of repair. In 1944, unlike
1943, such blows could be launched. Japanese air forces on New Guinea
might endanger or annihilate amphibious operations but they were far
weaker than Kenney's command and, as ever, were vulnerable to pre-
emptive airstrikes. Admiral Halsey's Third Fleet in the south/central
Pacific generally tied down the UN. The latter, however, could still
despatch naval forces greater than those under MacArthur's command
for short periods of time to the waters around the northern half of the
New Guinea theater.
The erosion of Japanese naval and air resources, combined with the
rise in his own logistical and amphibious capabilities, gave MacArthur
the opportunity to strike long and heavy blows at Japanese positions.
The potential range of his amphibious assaults increased from 80 to 800
miles from his main base. In principle, a repetitive pattern of stereo-
typed operations in predictable sectors of attack could be avoided. But
in practice, as Drea demonstrates, without Ultra MacArthur would not
have used these material resources with maximum effect; he might not
even have understood the new range of options open to him. Certainly
in early 1944, before the intervention of Ultra, MacArthur still pursued
a stereotyped line of operations: to strike directly at Hansa Bay, the
enemy's main line of resistance. This would have played straight into
Japan's hands. The IJA treated east-central New Guinea as a forward
glacis on which to delay the enemy and to weaken its strength.
Meanwhile it prepared to make north-western New Guinea a bastion for
Downloaded by [American Public University System] at 05:35 11 February 2014 


--- Page 32 ---
30 INTELLIGENCE AND NATIONAL SECURITY
part of the inner defensive sector, the Philippines. As Drea emphasizes,
a direct attack on the outer crust of Japanese defences at Hansa Bay
might well have failed and, had it done so, the southwest Pacific theater
would have been completely marginalized.
Once Ultra of a self-evident nature uncovered Japanese deployments
on New Guinea, in particular, the strength of its forward crust at Hansa
Bay and the weakness of its main supply base at Hollandia, MacArthur
jettisoned his plans. To precise knowledge and superior force he added
aggressive command and the calculated pursuit of great gains at the risk
of moderate losses. In March-April 1944 Kenney's forces demolished
enemy air strength in central New Guinea, followed immediately by the
seaborne seizure of Hollandia. This shattered Japanese defenses in the
southwest Pacific and split its forces on New Guinea into two halves.
Over the next two months a fast and aggressive amphibious campaign
seized north-western New Guinea before Japanese defenses could be
solidified, while several UN counter-attacks were parried. During the
four months between April to July 1944, MacArthur leapt five times
further than in the previous 24 months: his forces annihilated or isolated
five IJA divisions while suffering small American losses and smashed in
Japan's external defensive perimeter - just as Halsey's forces were
doing 1,000 miles to the north. MacArthur also seized bases for the
assault on the Philippines, the projected date of which was advanced by
five months. Then the attack on the relatively weak garrison of Leyte in
the Philippines during October 1944 caught Japan by surprise. Ultimat-
ely, the American hammer smashed three divisions and what remained
of Japan's regular naval and air forces on the anvil of Leyte. This gave
MacArthur the opportunity to render irrelevant and bypass much of the
inner perimeter of Japanese defenses, the Philippines. In any case, he
could now directly attack the most vital and vulnerable components of
the Japanese Empire - its line of maritime communications from
Singapore to Tokyo, and the Japanese home islands.
These operations and MacArthur's entire strategy of bypassing
enemy strongpoints and concentrating his power against weakly held
but strategically vital areas that could serve as forward logistical and air
bases, rested on intelligence, in particular, on Ultra. In the battle for
Leyte, Ultra also allowed American airforces to smash several units
and portions of the Japanese 23rd and 26th Divisions at sea, thus
crippling the defense of that island and the quality of several good
formations. Yet Ultra increasingly lost that function and this value once
American forces entered the Philippines. Tough fighting could no
longer be avoided, since strong garrisons held each position in the
innermost perimeter of Japanese defenses. MacArthur refused to
Downloaded by [American Public University System] at 05:35 11 February 2014 


--- Page 33 ---
CLAUSEWITZ, INTELLIGENCE, UNCERTAINTY AND COMMAND 31
bypass most of the Philippines but insisted on assaulting many of its
main islands, because he viewed the conquest of the Philippines as an
aim rather than a means: and an aim defined far less by the dictates of
strategy than his own personal prestige. The logic of the battlefield and
of MacArthur threw American forces directly against centers of Japa-
nese strength, instead of around them. This situation was like that in
New Guinea during 1943, with one difference - given a vast increase in
their firepower, American forces ground down the DA more quickly
and cheaply than before. By 1945 the Japanese command on Okinawa
calculated that every American division possessed five times more
firepower than any Japanese one.52 Even so, MacArthur's operations
cost time and American lives, and many of his assaults were unnecessary
for the advance upon Japan.
Simultaneously, these battles required the support of precisely that
sort of intelligence which SWPAC could least provide. MacArthur's
great campaign of March-October 1944 had rested on the basis of self-
evident Ultra. It had required exactly the material which Ultra was best
able to acquire and SWPAC to understand and use, on the enemy's
strategic intentions, perceptions, dispositions and redeployments. Intel-
ligence-on these strategic issues could differentiate enemy strongpoints
from centers of weakness. If SWPAC could determine where the enemy
was weak, it did not need precise intelligence on the composition of
garrisons which were known to be strong, so long as it proposed to
bypass them. This was fortunate, since even in mid-1944 its assessments
of such operational intelligence were mixed in quality. The lacunae in
Ultra and errors in its analysis led to gross miscalculations of the
strength of several garrisons which American forces did have to attack,
failures in assessing the maritime movement of some Japanese reinfor-
cements, especially its First Division, to Leyte, and a misunderstanding
of the enemy's intentions before the divisional strength attack at Aitepe
in New Guinea.
Once the strategy of bypassing was abandoned, and American forces
were condemned to attack Japanese strength head-on, these problems
in the acquisition and assessment of intelligence acquired more and
more importance. With the near-annihilation of the UN and of Japan's
ability to move soldiers and supplies by sea, cryptanalytical access to
traffic about maritime matters became irrelevant. Yet previously that
had been the main source of signals intelligence and of self-evident
Ultra, the material which SWPAC used most effectively. While the
IJA's operational codes yielded far more material than before, this
could not be used in a straightforward fashion. In essence, this traffic
provided opaque Ultra, SWPAC's traditional weak point, about the
Downloaded by [American Public University System] at 05:35 11 February 2014 


--- Page 34 ---
32 INTELLIGENCE AND NATIONAL SECURITY
least comprehensible aspect of the IJA, its order of battle and the
strength of its formations. Moreover, there must almost always be gaps
in the material provided by any single source of intelligence. Conti-
nually from November 1944 SWPAC misunderstood these issues, while
MacArthur ignored Ultra whenever it did not say what he wished to
hear. Not only this, to a large extent his strategy threw away the
potential advantages offered by Ultra.
When American forces entered the Philippines Ultra became less and
less useful. Misled by a combination of fragmentary intelligence,
especially regarding the strength of smaller formations and support
troops, and an analysis which rested on wishful thinking, Willoughby
underestimated the number of Japanese defenders on Luzon in the
Philippines by 50 per cent, or 130,000 soldiers. SWPAC's planning for
the invasion of Luzon rested on this assumption. MacArthur in
particular wished to fight a rapid and risky campaign which would have
played straight into the hands of a strong, effectively deployed and well-
led enemy. Fortunately, working from exactly the same data, Krueger's
headquarters assessed Japanese strength accurately and far better than
SWPAC did. Krueger, not MacArthur, ran the battle and he did so
through a broad and cautious advance which took Japanese- power
properly into account. This reduced to a minimum American casualties
but also the speed of the campaign. On Luzon as on Okinawa, isolated
and outnumbered IJA forces substantially reduced the American
strength available to attack the Japanese home islands. By 1944, alone
among the Axis armed services, the fighting quality of the IJA had not
generally collapsed from its peak of 1942. A strategy of bypassing
rendered most of its strengths irrelevant and exploited all of its
weaknesses. Once bypassing was abandoned, the abiding power of the
IJA could again support Japan's strategy of delay and attrition of
American manpower and willpower.
Gaps in Ultra and mistakes in its interpretation did not hamper the
invasion of Luzon but neither did signals intelligence particularly help it.
Ultra showed Krueger that he must fight a careful and cautious
campaign, but this was his predilection in any case, and not an
unreasonable one given the known quality and characteristics of the
IJA. Ultra certainly had little effect on his operations once ashore.
In Operation Olympic, the projected invasion of Kyushu, Ultra was
more successful. It was the only source of strategic intelligence
available to American planners and in some ways a strikingly effective
source. It located 13 of the 14 divisions in Kyushu and uncovered the
IJA's entire defensive strategy. Conversely, Ultra did not define the
strength of these units. Thus Willoughby underestimated the number of
Downloaded by [American Public University System] at 05:35 11 February 2014 


--- Page 35 ---
CLAUSEWITZ, INTELLIGENCE, UNCERTAINTY AND COMMAND 33
Japanese soldiers on Kyushu by some 40 per cent. Mac Arthur rejected
this calculation as defeatist and held that Japanese forces were even
smaller than Willoughby supposed. Fortunately, the plan of campaign
which rested on this optimism was not put to the test, largely because of
the indirect influence of Ultra.
Ultra also shaped the politics of American strategy at the theater level
throughout 1944-45. It was not the only factor at play, but until Ultra is
accounted for, the decisions to invade the Philippines and to use the
atomic bomb will be misunderstood.53 During 1942-43 SWPAC was a
command of tertiary importance. The operations of 1944 made the terr-
itory under its control a plausible base for the assault on the Japanese
home islands: and MacArthur immediately brought the Philippines to
the forefront of American strategy. While Chester Nimitz and 'Bull'
Halsey, potential rivals for dominance over American strategy in the
Pacific, accepted MacArthur's case, the Joint Chiefs of Staff were less
accommodating. Here Ultra became MacArthur's trump card. During
the debate over the future of American strategy between June and
August 1944, assessments of Japanese capabilities and intentions rested
primarily on Ultra. MacArthur's operations of the period, his drafting
and redrafting of plans for the invasion of the Philippines, were shaped
by Ultra not only in operational terms but in political ones - by the need
to overcome the arguments, often themselves derived from interpre-
tations of Ultra, put forward by opponents to his strategy. Conversely,
Ultra may have saved Americans and Japanese alike from paying the
price on Kyushu for MacArthur's ambition to command the largest
amphibious assault the world had ever seen.
Ultra was fundamental to the American decision to use the atomic
bomb: indeed, Edward Drea has demolished the view that intelligence
should have led Washington away from any use of that weapon. The
best source of strategic intelligence available to American decision-
makers in the summer of 1945 was not 'Magic' but Ultra. Magic
demonstrated - indirectly - the intentions of the liberal Japanese
faction, which had routinely lost power struggles in Tokyo for 15 years.
It revealed that even they pursued peace terms which the United States
would not accept. Ultra revealed - directly - the capabilities of the IJA
and the intentions of the faction which dominated Japanese policy. It
showed that the IJA intended to make Kyushu a second Okinawa and
fight to the death, taking tens of thousands of Americans killed and
hundreds of thousands of wounded with them, not to mention millions
of Japanese. An assessment of the intelligence record as a whole - as
against mere Magic - makes the attitudes of American decision-makers
towards the atomic bomb more explicable. Ultra directly pressed the
Downloaded by [American Public University System] at 05:35 11 February 2014 


--- Page 36 ---
34 INTELLIGENCE AND NATIONAL SECURITY
United States towards the use of the atomic bomb and away from a
conventional amphibious assault.
Viewed with hindsight, the Pacific war was a classic case of military
overkill. Japan was so outweighed by Western technology and Ameri-
can industry that a single-handed Japanese victory was impossible. Even
its survival as an independent state was unlikely. Only if Germany had
won the war in Europe and come to rescue its ally (which, in turn, might
have been possible only if Japan had joined in an attack on Russia
during 1941 instead of starting the Pacific War in the first place) was any
kind of Japanese victory conceivable. So, even though signals intelli-
gence clearly was involved in Japan's defeat, obvious questions remain.
How important was Ultra? Was it necessary to victory? Could the war
have been won without it and in what way? While these questions
cannot receive a definitive answer, they can be addressed through three
arguments.
First, in 1942 Ultra was a necessary although not a sufficient cause for
the elimination of the UN's superiority at sea in the battle of Midway -
luck, Japanese errors, American strength and Chester Nimitz were of
equal significance. Then, by shaping the American decision to invade
Guadalcanal, traffic analysis helped to lead Japan toward a campaign
of material attrition in the south and southwest Pacific.54 Ultimately
these events significantly hastened the withering of Japanese military
power.
Second, in 1944 Ultra was necessary to the strategy of bypassing,
which short-circuited Japan's hopes to grind down American will
through human attrition. This Japanese strategy was not necessarily
foredoomed. Even accounting for the desire to avenge Pearl Harbor,
the United States would not have had to pay an unlimited price simply
to annihilate Japan. Had conventional forces been the only kind
involved, the United States might have been ready to accept a more
favorable kind of negotiated peace than Japan in effect received. After
all, in Korea and Vietnam between 1950 and 1975, states with no more
firepower than Japan and a similar style of military operations so eroded
American will and killed American soldiers as to make the United
States tolerate a military and diplomatic stalemate. The United States
suffered heavy losses on New Guinea and Tarawa in 1943, Leyte in
1944, Luzon, Okinawa and Iwo Jima during 1945. This butcher's bill
would have been far higher had the United States been unable to leap
through Japan's defense perimeters by attacking only a few and weakly
held islands. Of course, even then it can never be established whether
the United States would have refused to pay the bill for the simple
pleasure of making Japan surrender unconditionally.
Downloaded by [American Public University System] at 05:35 11 February 2014 


--- Page 37 ---
CLAUSEWITZ, INTELLIGENCE, UNCERTAINTY AND COMMAND 35
Third, however, that argument is not merely hypothetical but irrele-
vant. Even had the American Army been ground to a halt on the field of
battle, atomic weapons probably would have still forced Japan to
surrender - and Pearl Harbor ensured that these weapons would be
used. Thus, signals intelligence clearly was not necessary to American
victory in the Pacific war. Only if Germany had won the struggle in
Europe and the United States been forced into a simultaneous two-
ocean war might Ultra have become the straw which broke the back of
Japan. On the other hand, very few single factors are absolutely
essential for victory in a prolonged war of attrition and signals intelli-
gence clearly was a major contributing cause to American victory. It
allowed the United States to defeat Japan far more speedily and at a
lower cost. This, of course, was exactly what Ultra allowed the Western
Allies to do against Germany in Europe at the same time.55
This analysis rests largely on the narrative of Edward Drea. He has
also provided several general observations about Ultra and MacArthur
which contribute to an examination of intelligence and military ope-
rations. Contrary to Drea's own expectations, Ultra never shaped
MacArthur's strategy; it rarely affected the formulation (as against the
execution) even of his major operations. Whatever intelligence indi-
cated, MacArthur's aims never changed: to make his command the
center of the American effort in the Pacific, to retake the Philippines
and to win the war through an invasion of Japan. These objectives, Drea
insists, stemmed from vanity no less than rationality, although to some
degree they were defensible on strategic grounds. For MacArthur, Ultra
was a tool to achieve his own aims rather than to help him choose among
them. He used intelligence when this helped him further his objectives
and ignored it when that would not. While this is conventional for many
commanders, it is not always so. MacArthur falls into the group of
generals in the twentieth century who were least likely to change their
aims or means because of intelligence. Finally, Drea offers a brief and
tantalizing statement about the effect of intelligence on commanders of
specific personality types: 'ULTRA appears to have reinforced basic
personality traits. It convinced forceful commanders to take risks and
push forward, just as it persuaded prudent ones to go even more
slowly.'56 From a study of this generalization, combined with the use of
the intelligence record as a mirror of generalship, one can link together
different issues: several generals' use of Ultra and their style of
command, the relationship between Ultra and uncertainty, and the role
of intelligence in war. All of these issues, in turn, illuminate matters
fundamental to Clausewitz's arguments and to the study of war: the
Downloaded by [American Public University System] at 05:35 11 February 2014 


--- Page 38 ---
36 INTELLIGENCE AND NATIONAL SECURITY
importance of intuition and determination in thought, of boldness in
operations, the nature of understanding, command and action in war.
INTELLIGENCE AND MODERN WAR
When his actions are compared with his knowledge, Kenney stands out
as a bold, flexible, quick-thinking and far-sighted commander. Relati-
vely superior intelligence of a high absolute order was fundamental to
his success, yet he acted on knowledge with skill, resolution and
audacity. Here is a commander who embodies what generally would be
regarded as a superb union of knowledge, boldness, superior intellect
and cunning. Krueger and, to a lesser extent, Blarney fell into the
psychological category which Clausewitz regarded as the norm: the
cautious commander who wanted reinforcements against uncertainty.
And of course overwhelming superiority is the most effective guarantee
against uncertainty - not surprisingly, the first rule in Clausewitz's art of
war is to be as strong as possible, especially at the decisive point.57 Yet
one must not separate psychological characteristics from their operatio-
nal and doctrinal context. Caution, if guided by knowledge or intuition,
as opposed to being merely an irrational response to uncertainty, could
be a valuable characteristic against an enemy whose offensive ope-
rations were stereotypically aggressive and whose defensive positions
were well prepared. To adopt an aggressive but unbalanced defense
against a Japanese attack was to give the IJA its greatest chance to play
its strong cards of speed and maneuver and to avoid the Allied trump
card of prepared firepower; conversely, caution allied to knowledge,
intuition or cunning could force the IJA to attack Allied strength head-
on. Similarly, for an Allied commander to launch aggressive and
unprepared assaults against thick Japanese defensive positions would be
to throw away his trump card and to gamble on the weak card of the
ability to tolerate losses. Daring in operational maneuver through such
matters as outflanking or bypassing was often, though not always, an
effective way to negate the IJA strength - it certainly led to the greatest
of Allied successes against Japan. When forced to attack prepared
Japanese positions, however, boldness in tactics and operations was
almost by definition recklessness, for precisely the same reasons that it
had been on the western front during 1915-17. Set-piece battles were
the rational response to this situation. Caution rather then boldness
might best allow a commander to exploit the known offensive and
defensive characteristics of the IJA.
For Blarney and Krueger caution, combined with skill in set-piece
operations, did pay great strategic dividends. Blarney's plan for the
Downloaded by [American Public University System] at 05:35 11 February 2014 


--- Page 39 ---
CLAUSEWITZ, INTELLIGENCE, UNCERTAINTY AND COMMAND 37
drive on Lae and Salamaua in New Guinea between June and Sep-
tember 1943, for example, deliberately eschewed the boldness preferred
by MacArthur, and properly so. As Blarney calculated, by instinct
rather than knowledge, to advance further than Nassau Bay would be to
attack the IJA where it was strongest. By stopping at Nassau Bay, he
could force the IJA to advance and attack him, out of effective range of
its own air support and into the maws of his defensive firepower. All
this, in turn, would weaken the IJA's rear defenses, ease the success of
another and deeper amphibious strike and, when that happened, trap
more enemy forces.
This plan worked as planned, which is unusual in war. It was similar
to a successful approach adopted by the Canadian Corps against the
German Army in the battle of Hill 70 in 1917 and by the Canadian and
Australian Corps at Amiens in 1918 - proof that caution, the use of the
operational offensive combined with the tactical defensive, and set-
piece battles guided by knowledge and intuition, have a proven track
record against armies which institutionalize aggressive risk-taking along-
side defensive systems relying on tactical or operational counter-
attack.58 This approach to operations made Dominion forces, division
for division, the Germans' most effective enemies in both world wars. It
could easily be used against any enemy which followed German
defensive systems, including the IJA. At Lae/Salamaua, Blarney con-
sciously applied the style of operations which the Dominion armies had
used to smash the Germans in 1917-18 and which they were using to the
same purpose in the Middle East and Europe. His understanding
stemmed both from an instinctive grasp of how the IJA fought and of
how set-piece battles were conducted, and from better intelligence than
Clausewitz would have expected, though this stood far from the
standard of perfection. Ultra informed the Allies of the overall strength
of Japanese forces on New Guinea, but their specific deployment
remained very unclear. Hence Blarney's strategy rested one third on
information, one third on cunning and one third on a Clausewitzian
technique to manage uncertainty. The attack on Nassau Bay acted as a
magnet for the IJA, and thus uncovered its deployment in the forward
area; this also threw the enemy off balance. Caution 'governed by
superior intellect' overcame uncertainty and an aggressive enemy.
Krueger lacked Blarney's brilliance. He was a cautious, methodical
and deliberate commander, perhaps more so than is justifiable, but his
approach, none the less, was effective. He cannot be faulted for
adopting a bad means to deal with the IJA, merely for not choosing the
best, and even this criticism is of dubious accuracy. During the course of
Downloaded by [American Public University System] at 05:35 11 February 2014 


--- Page 40 ---
38 INTELLIGENCE AND NATIONAL SECURITY
his operations Ultra had reached a state of technical maturity while
Krueger also established an able intelligence staff. Professional assess-
ments of intelligence shaped his operational aims and means no less
than was true of Kenney. The intelligence record explains and to a large
extent justifies the controversial decisions to adopt slow and methodical
means to clear both Leyte and Luzon. Krueger's caution stemmed from
two distinct but related factors, a personality reflex and a rational
response to specific circumstances. Headlong charges against deep and
prepared Japanese defenses would produce far more American casual-
ties for no better results in battle than prepared attacks, and perhaps for
no quicker results.
The mirror of Ultra offers an odd reflection of Mac Arthur, one which
should be considered by students of his operations during the Korean
War. He had a closed mind regarding aims. He was remarkably
reluctant to change even his means once he had defined them. When on
the defensive, in conditions of uncertainty, against an enemy with the
initiative and superior force, as between June and August 1942 during
the period surrounding the Japanese invasion of Buna and Milne Bay,
MacArthur could be a cautious, even a passive, commander. When
gripped completely in the toils of uncertainty and facing an enemy with
overwhelming power and virtually complete initiative, as on the Philip-
pines in the hours immediately following the outbreak of the Pacific
war, MacArthur could be utterly paralysed. He was at his worst in
adversity, and at his best when he possessed superior force and the
initiative. Then, daring and tenacity of purpose were MacArthur's
cardinal characteristics - if not always desirable ones, as Blarney
appreciated at Salamaua and Krueger on Luzon. As MacArthur wrote
in February 1942:
Counsels of timidity based upon theories of safety first will not win
against such an aggressive and audacious adversary as Japan . . .
The only way to beat him is to fight him incessantly. Combat must
not be avoided but must be sought so that the ultimate policy of
attrition can at once become effective. No matter what the
theoretical odds may be against us, if we fight him we will beat
him.59
MacArthur fits the crude version of Clausewitz's 'military genius',
with the emphasis upon the determination, willpower and aggressive
risk-taking of the commander. In fact, however, with MacArthur as
with Douglas Haig, the vulgarized version turned the model on its head.
Strength of character, boldness and determination became closed-
Downloaded by [American Public University System] at 05:35 11 February 2014 


--- Page 41 ---
CLAUSEWITZ, INTELLIGENCE, UNCERTAINTY AND COMMAND 39
mindedness, obstinacy and lack of originality. The value of MacArthur's
psychological characteristics as commander turned on intelligence and
military conditions. Given the knowledge and the chance to maneuver
away from the enemy's strength and toward its weakness, MacArthur's
aggressiveness produced impressive actions. Without that knowledge
(or the willingness to use it), without that opportunity and will,
MacArthur's weaknesses as a commander came to the fore and
aggression tended to become liability. Time after time he took great
risks to win the biggest stakes, a kind of mentality which must inevitably
lead a commander to a crushing defeat. Time after time he preferred to
assault the enemy where it was strongest. Ultra staved off the potential
consequences of these weaknesses, but they had their inevitable result
along the Yalu River in 1950.
A combination of superior power, room to maneuver, good intelli-
gence and luck was necessary to turn MacArthur's daring to use. Of
these four, the first two were necessary in individual terms. The latter
two were collectively necessary but on its own each was merely a
contributing factor. MacArthur could live without luck so long as he had
intelligence. He could often live without knowledge so long as all of
these other conditions held true, but intelligence always made his
operations easier and it was necessary for his great successes between
March and November 1944. MacArthur also acted on secret infor-
mation with resolution and speed - when he wanted to believe it. Unlike
Kenney and Krueger, however, he was not an intelligence-driven
commander. In effect, he acted on Clausewitz's 'imperative principle' -
he changed his first opinion only when forced to do so by clear
conviction, and only when irrefutable evidence pointed tov/ard a better
means to achieve his prime directive, and he never changed his aims.
With MacArthur, the better and more trusted the knowledge, the more
daring and determined the action: the less certain the situation, the
more pedestrian the response. Yet this was just a tendency, a strong but
not an invariable pattern. MacArthur finally turned the Bismarck
barricade in late 1943 through the invasion of Arawe, which rested on a
gamble rather than knowledge. This was an instance of aggressive risk-
taking that Clausewitz himself would most likely have regarded as bold.
The intelligence record determines some of the characteristics of
MacArthur and his lieutenants and also indicates their quality. It
enhances Kenney's reputation which needed little refurbishing, while
substantially rehabilitating that of Krueger. It also shows Blarney to
have been a shrewd commander, a surprisingly able one who under-
stood both the enemy and the art of war in his theater. MacArthur does
not come out of the study at the level indicated by Drea - as one
Downloaded by [American Public University System] at 05:35 11 February 2014 


--- Page 42 ---
40 INTELLIGENCE AND NATIONAL SECURITY
of the four or five best commanders in the war - but he certainly stands
out as a good and gifted general, of mixed qualities and achievements.
The intelligence record demolishes the hero-worship and self-
mythologization of earlier works along with the uncomplimentary
assessments of the recent revisionist literature. It shows him warts and
all, as a far from average commander - weak in some ways, strong in
others. A reading of Drea also leads to a surprising conclusion: while
intelligence staffs notably improved their ability to handle Ultra, there
was no learning curve in its use by MacArthur and his lieutenants. They
started as well as they finished, as regards Ultra of both categories,
fragmentary and finished material. Indeed, MacArthur handled intelli-
gence in Korea exactly as he had in the Pacific. In particular, during the
drive to the Yalu his refusal to consider intelligence which challenged
the aims he had laid down, and his use of intelligence in policy debates
with his superiors, were identical to his practice of 1945. The record also
sustains part of Drea's argument that Ultra reinforced 'the basic
personality traits' of specific commanders. It certainly led aggressive
risk-takers to become even more audacious but it led cautious ones to
become not more prudent but rather more calculated. This observation
has significance for the theory of command and decision-making in war.
INTELLIGENCE, OPERATIONS AND THE FUTURE OF WAR
Some provisional observations may be drawn about the modern rela-
tionship between intelligence and uncertainty, and its effect on the art of
war, the psychology of command and the nature of and need for military
genius. These conclusions pertain specifically to a situation where
superior and knowing forces fight inferior and ignorant enemies, who
adopt a vulgarized version of the Clausewitzian formula for managing
uncertainty. It also applies to cases where one side possesses intelligence
services which are (a) of an absolutely good quality and (b) superior to
those of the enemy. These conclusions do not necessarily apply to
different circumstances. When both sides possess equal and effective
intelligence, for example, the result may be the military equivalent of
chess. Alternatively, when intelligence of such quality and equality is
derived from sources that can easily be destroyed if only they are known
to exist - as would have been true of many types of Ultra - the same
situation may lead each side simultaneously to blind the other and
plunge the battlefield back into darkness. Similarly, when both sides
possess equally poor intelligence, Clausewitz's predictions may once
again pertain. However, a mediocre intelligence service when con-
Downloaded by [American Public University System] at 05:35 11 February 2014 


--- Page 43 ---
CLAUSEWITZ, INTELLIGENCE, UNCERTAINTY AND COMMAND 41
FIGURE 1
POSSIBLE COMBINATIONS OF HIGH/LOW QUALITY INTELLIGENCE
BETWEEN TWO OPPONENTS
POSSIBLE COMBINATIONS OF HIGH/LOW
QUALITY INTELLIGENCE BETWEEN
TWO OPPONENTS
SIDE A
GOOD POOR
GOOD
SIDEB
POORGOOD/GOOD
POOR/GOODGOOD/POOR
POOR/POOR
fronting a poor one may give its master a remarkable edge. One need
not move far from uncertainty before Clausewitz's rules cease to apply
with certainty.
In the case at hand, when intelligence helps the stronger side but not
the weaker, the latter fights in the fog of war, the former merely in mist.
The debilitating effect of confusion and uncertainty is reduced for one
but only one army. Only reduced - never eliminated. Intelligence can
never achieve complete and absolute perfection; no sane commander
will ever expect it to be so. As E.T. Williams, the head of intelligence
for the British 21st Army Group, wrote about his experience with Ultra:
Perfect Intelligence in war must of necessity be out-of-date and
therefore cease to be perfect. We deal with partial and outmoded
sources from which we attempt to compose an intelligible appre-
ciation having regard to the rules of evidence and our soldierly
training and which we must be prepared constantly to revise as
Downloaded by [American Public University System] at 05:35 11 February 2014 


--- Page 44 ---
42 INTELLIGENCE AND NATIONAL SECURITY
new evidence emerges. We deal not with the true but with the
likely. Speed is therefore the essence of the matter.60
Any single piece of information can remain accurate for only a certain
period of time: completeness in intelligence requires the collation of
many such pieces: and during the time required to achieve perfection in
that process, some of these pieces cease to be accurate. Given the
dialectical and paradoxical nature of strategy and intelligence, more-
over, good information well understood about a phenomenon is likely
to make commanders take actions which change the phenomenon and
thus render imperfect the information, its assessment and the actions
flowing from them.
By definition, even with excellent intelligence, friction and the
reciprocal nature of war ensure that uncertainty will still exist, if in a
different form and, perhaps, to a lesser degree. Nor are intelligence and
uncertainty linked in a simple linear relationship. As one first moves a
certain distance away from the pole of ignorance, more intelligence may
create more certainty; but as one moves closer still to the pole of
knowledge, the greater the volume of information, again the greater the
uncertainty: indeed, a new kind of uncertainty will be produced. Nor
can intelligence ever be a universal panacea in war. Its value will always
vary with the operational circumstances. Good intelligence well under-
stood may be useless: a good army with bad intelligence may well defeat
a bad army with good intelligence.
None the less, such instances as MacArthur's operations of 1944,
Kenney's air campaigns and the Allied amphibious assaults on Europe,
all point to one thing. Against a bold, powerful but ignorant enemy,
especially one whose forces are unbalanced or taking substantial risks, a
daring and powerful force reinforced by knowledge can strike far more
precise blows than Clausewitz would have dreamed possible. The
greater degree of precision will render these blows all the more deadly.
This may also be true of inferior but informed forces, as shown by
Nimitz's decision to gamble on knowledge at Midway. Yet, as Blarney,
Krueger and Montgomery at El Alamein and Medennine demonstrate,
the frequency and the success of calculated styles of command have also
risen, particularly when attacking a strong and effectively deployed
enemy.
Clausewitz's rules of thumb and estimates of probable outcomes do
not completely fit modern circumstances because some of his assump-
tions are no longer valid. Far more frequently than he expected, for
example, generals were able to strike precisely intended blows precisely as
intended and to surprise their enemies in specific ways through deliber-
Downloaded by [American Public University System] at 05:35 11 February 2014 


--- Page 45 ---
CLAUSEWITZ, INTELLIGENCE, UNCERTAINTY AND COMMAND 43
ate intent. Moreover, a larger fraction of generals seems to have been
able to function effectively in conditions of knowledge than of ignor-
ance. Many of these generals may not have been military geniuses, but
perhaps military genius is less fundamental to command in circum-
stances of knowledge: perhaps then military competence augmented by
good intelligence will suffice. While not all men can be good com-
manders, some previously barred from that status now could achieve
success on the battlefield when the heightened power of intelligence
reduced the scale of uncertainty and the density of the fog of war. This
reduced some - not all - of the friction of war; arguably, so too did other
improvements in the workings of military technology and organization,
such as communication systems. In particular, during the era of
Clausewitz, the commander almost literally did perform the entire
function of command: his staff was nothing but a small secretariat. Since
then, command has become the joint function of a man and an
institution: the staff has become a bureaucracy and the commander
anything from chairman of the board to CEO. Room remains for the
freedom of action of the commander, the influence of his personality
and the exercise of his genius, especially at a tactical and operational
level, but these factors are restrained. The corresponding loss in
potential drive and creativity is balanced by the improved general
efficiency of the military machine. This has changed the nature of the
personality which understands and acts on intelligence: once it was a
single mind, now it is one mind harnessed in different ways to an
institution. In some cases, the commander becomes an executive
implementing a collective decision and his personality becomes less
relevant to command; in others, his personality remains the dominant
factor at play.
The heightened power of intelligence altered the intellectual faculties
which Clausewitz thought necessary for command. He regarded
'presence of mind' as valuable, for example, because it alone allowed
immediate and competent decisions when some of the fog of war
suddenly lifted. But for that group of commanders who knew in advance
what lay behind that patch of fog, this faculty became less significant
than the ability to act effectively on such knowledge. Informed intuition
probably remained essential to military genius, but, perhaps, not to
military competence so long as that faculty was augmented by intelli-
gence. Above all, the heightened value of intelligence sapped the value
of determination (in Clausewitz's sense) as a factor in military genius.
That commander who dogmatically followed Clausewitz's 'imperative
principle' of sticking tenaciously to first opinion despite contradictory
material was a fool. Many more commanders had 'adequate grounds'
Downloaded by [American Public University System] at 05:35 11 February 2014 


--- Page 46 ---
44 INTELLIGENCE AND NATIONAL SECURITY
for action than Clausewitz thought possible, and therefore had less need
for determination (in his sense). When time was short, of course,
presence of mind remained as crucial: when battles became fluid, and
very often good intelligence and Teal-time communications systems
failed, then determination (in Clausewitz's sense) remained vital. None
the less, qualities fundamental to command in the age of uncertainty
often proved counter-productive in the era of Ultra - of good intelli-
gence and real-time communication. Indeed, military genius itself may
actually be counter-productive in an era of excellent and reliable
intelligence. Geniuses do not need great knowledge to perform effecti-
vely. They often make a fetish of faith in their intuition.61 Military
competents need all the help they can get and often know that fact.
They have far more than military geniuses to gain from reducing the
environment which makes geniuses so formidable - uncertainty - and
this obviously can be done through a use of intelligence no less than
through the concentration of superior power. Greater intelligence, that
is, cuts at the roots of the superiority of the military genius - it may
altogether eliminate that edge.
Nor is that the end of the story. Intelligence affects another important
condition of war. The effect of 'fortune' - of unforeseen, unforeseeable
and unintended matters - was central to all classical theories of strategy.
Thucydides and Machiavelli, Clausewitz and Napoleon, all regarded
luck as fundamental to success or failure in war. Many premodern
commentators implied that strokes of fortune were caused by the
intentional intervention of providence or else somehow were the natural
and consistent product of a commander's character. Thus, so goes the
story, when considering whether to make a man a general, Napoleon
asked one question: 'Is he lucky?'. Clausewitz, conversely, stripped
connotations of intention and the consequences of character from his
idea of 'chance'. To him, chance meant nothing more or less than
random events produced by the interplay between a huge range of
unforeseeable and uncontrollable factors.
Precisely these issues have changed in the modern age of better
intelligence, real-time communication, and powerful staffs. What once
were random actions now often can be predicted and controlled. Armies
can foresee far more than before, and execute their intentions far
better. Thus, the effect of 'fortune' on war has declined along with its
plausibility as an excuse for defeat. Not that luck can ever vanish from
war. It will particularly affect the tactical and lower operational levels,
often as much as it has always done. On the plane of higher operations
and strategy, however, its significance will decline. Luck will remain a
factor in calculated risks, though far less important than in the era of
Downloaded by [American Public University System] at 05:35 11 February 2014 


--- Page 47 ---
CLAUSEWITZ, INTELLIGENCE, UNCERTAINTY AND COMMAND 45
uncertainty. When two armies with informed but opposing intentions
clash, moreover, much that they know will change and so will their
ability to execute their intentions. Above all, where one side has better
intelligence, it will rely on knowledge while the fate of its foe will hinge
on chance. Intelligence can directly replace luck. 'Fortune', so long
queen of the battlefield, has been dethroned by a pawn.
The heightened power of intelligence in the Second World War did
not change the relationship between generals exemplifying Clausewitz's
two kinds of unregulated temperament: aggressive risk-takers remained
superior to timid generals. Intelligence, however, did increase the
superiority over these two of every case of temperament guided by
reason - it provided a more solid and rational basis for audacity
governed by superior intellect or cunning, and deliberate caution. It also
increased the frequency of these cases. Krueger and perhaps even
Montgomery or Blamey might have been timid generals in a different
age of uncertainty and intelligence, but in the Second World War they
were calculating ones. Hence, aggressive risk-taking became a con-
ditional virtue. Sometimes it produced all the rewards promised by
boldness (in Clausewitz's sense). Aggressive risk-taking, however, was
automatically and without warning converted to recklessness whenever
it confronted boldness or deliberate caution guided by intelligence.
Clausewitz himself noted: 'Even in daring there can be method and
caution; but here they are measured by a different standard.' They must
be measured by a different standard again in conditions of greater
certainty. Thus, the exceptions to Clausewitz's generalizations about
audacity became increasingly common - so much so as to challenge the
rule.
All told, between 1914 and 1945 better intelligence reduced the value
of certain characteristics in the Clausewitzian equation, particularly
determination and nerve, and increased that of others, especially
calculation and the ability to act on sure knowledge in a precise way.62
Certain gifts of character declined in value, some others of intellect and
technique rose. Clausewitz most prized the gifts which allowed com-
manders to act without knowledge, but all these gifts have different
values when one can act on knowledge. His prescriptions were formu-
lated to suit the intelligent commander without intelligence: they had to
be revised to suit the intelligent (or the competent) commander with
intelligence.
But this situation may have changed again. The world wars of this
century were, perhaps, that period when the ability of armies to acquire,
assess and act on intelligence was at its peak in history. The relationship
between uncertainty and intelligence may have changed as much since
Downloaded by [American Public University System] at 05:35 11 February 2014 


--- Page 48 ---
THE EVOLUTION OF THE ROLE OF INTELLIGENCE IN MILITARY OPERATIONS AND WAR
FHE COMMANDER'S
INTEREST IN
INTELLIGENCE
ORGANIZATION
SCOPE & RANGE
SOURCES AND
RELIABILITY1800*
AD HOC. AS NEEDED IMMEDIATEY BEFORE
AND DURING BATTLE LOWTRUSTINTHE
QUALITY, RELIABILITY AND RELEVANCE OF
INTELLIGENCE. MOST DECISIONS ARE BASED
ON PERSONAL AND INTUITIVE JUDGMENT.
NO PERMANENT ORGANIZATION. INITIATED
BY THE LOCAL REQUIREMENTS OF THE
COMMANDER
MOSTLY SHORT-RANGE TINE OF VISION"
DIRECT OBSERVATION. PRIMARILY TACTICAU
OPERATIONAL
HUMINT - SPIES, DIRECT OBSERVATION.
DIFRCaTTOTRANSMIT IN REAL TIME. LOW
REUABIUTY, HENCE LITTLE TRUST IN ITS
VALUE1914-1945
INTELLIGENCE IS USED EXTENSIVELY BEFORE
AND DURING BATTLE. TRUST IN ITS QUAUTY,
RELIABIUTY AND USEFULNESS IS MEDIUM TO
HIGH. DECISIONS ARE PARTLY PERSONAL BUT
INCREASINGLY DEPEND ON INTELLIGENCE
MUCH LESS ON INTUITION. INTELLIGENCE CAN
BE IGNORED OR OVERRULED BY PERSONAL
DECISIONS BUT INCREASED RELIANCE ON IN-
TELLIGENCE INPUT.
LARGE PERMANENT INTELLIGENCE ORGANI-
ZATIONS AND BUREAUCRACY, PRIMARILY
MILITARY. RELATIVELY SMALL IN PEACE-TIME,
GREATLY EXPANDED IN WAR.
SHORT JLONGERflANGL ENTIRETHEATER
OF WAR-TACTICAL, OPERATIONAL AND
STRATEGIC
ALL SOURCES • HUMINT, PHOTINT, SIGINT
CAN READILY BE TRANSMITTED IN REALTIME.
REUABIUTY I TRUST VARIES DRASTICALLY
ONCE BATTLE BEGINS, DEPENDING ON CIR-
CUMSTANCES.PRESENT AND FUTURE
MAJOR DECISIONS WITHOUT INTEWGENCE
ARE UNLIKELY. GREAT DEPENDENCE ON IN-
TELLIGENCE AND MUCH LESS RELIANCE ON
PERSONAL JUDGMENT. "ADDICTION1 TO INTEL-
LIGENCE MAKES INDEPENDENT-CREATIVE AD
HOC DECISIONS LESS LIKELY. "COLLECTIVE
DECISIONS"TEAMANDSTAFFWORK. HEAVY
RELIANCE ON INTELLIGENCE.
VERY LARGE AND PERMANENT INTELLIGENCE
ORGANIZATIONS AND BUREAUCRACIES, BOTH
MILITARY AND CIVILIAN.
GLOBAL AND THEATER ON ALL LEVELS.
ALL SOURCES AND ALL LEVELS • HUMINT,
PHOTINT, SIGINT CAN BE TRANSMITTED IN
REALTIME AN INCREASED CAPACITY FOR THE
COMMANDER TO COLLECT HIS OWN RELIABLE
INTELLIGENCE IN BATTLEac5
til
Downloaded by [American Public University System] at 05:35 11 February 2014 


--- Page 49 ---
PROBLEMS
THE BALANCE
OF INTELLIGENCE
SOLUTIONS TO
PROBLEMS AND
BETTER USE1800*
LACKOFTRUST, LACK OF INTEREST. UN-
CERTAINTY CREATED BY DEARTH OF INTELLI-
GENCE (UNCERTAINTY OF TYPE A DOMINATES)
ALL SIDES FACE EQUAL PROBLEMS.
GREATER RELIANCE ON THE EXPERIENCE
AND INTUITION OF THE COMMANDER, THE ART
OFWAR TRANSFERENCE OF UNCERTAINTY
BY INITIATIVE, MOVEMENT & OFFENSIVE TO
OTHER SIDE MAXIMUM CONCENTRATION,
KEEPING RESERVES AT HAND. 'STAND UKE
A ROCK*. INTUITIVE RISK-TAKING.1914-1945
OFTEN POOR UNDERSTANDING OF WHAT IN-
TELLIGENCE CAN AND CANNOT DO, TRUST IS
BASED ON PAST PERSONAL EXPERIENCES.
ATTITUDE STILL SHAPED BY DOCTRINES FORM-
ULATED IN PREMOOERNTWE (I.E. 18C0S)
SOME SIDES ARE BETTER OR MUCH BETTER
IN INTELLIGENCE GATHERING. ADVANTAGE
CAN SHIFT PERMANENTLY OR TEMPORARILY
FROMONESIDETOANOTHER. INTELLIGENCE
BECOMES A MAJOR WEAPON OR FORCE MULTV
PUERDMDER.
BETTER UNDERSTANDING OF THE VALUE AND
UMTTSOF INTELLIGENCE; POSITIVE EXPERI-
ENCE ART OF WAR AS IN 1800 THOUGH IN-
CREASED RELIANCE ON INTELLIGENCE
CALCULATED RISK-TAKING.PRESENT AND FUTURE
GREATER DEPENDENCE ON INTELLIGENCE
THOUGH NOT ALWAYS BETTER UNDERSTAND-
ING. OVERREUANCE ON INTELLIGENCE WHILE
ART OF COMMAND AND WAR ARE NEGLECTED.
UNCERTAINTY CREATED BY TOO MUCH INTELLI-
GENCE (UNCERTAINTY TYPE B DOMINATES)
AS IN 1914-1945, BUT THE GAP BETWEEN THE
BESTANOWORSTISWtOENED. THE OPTIMAL
USE OF MODERN PRECISION-GUIDED WEAPONS
REQUIRES MORE AND BETTER REAL-TIME
INTELLIGENCE
NEED FOR BETTER EDUCATION IN INTELLIGENCE
MATTERS. RELEARNING4 FORMULATING THE
ART OFWAR IN RELATION TO INTELLIGENCE.
NEED TO KNOW WHEN TO TAKE ACTION AND
NOT WAIT FOR THE LAST BIT OF INTELLIGENCE.
MORE DEDICATED REALTIME INTELLIGENCE.
BETTER ORGANIZATION PREPARATION DISTILLA-
TION AND DISTRIBUTION OF INTELLIGENCE
• OCCASIONALLY, COMMANDERS UKE WELLINGTON AND SHERMAN PAY GREAT ATTENTION
TOINTEaiGENCE. SUCH MARGINAL IMPROVEMENT CAN UPSET THE BALANCE OF
INTELLIGENCE IN ONE SIDE'S FAVO R AND HAVE MAJOR OPERATIONAL CONSEOUENCES.2Scpatn
nO
zcmo>
c;
tn
00N
tnrr
3tn
o
m
c
o
tn
3
zooo2
>
Downloaded by [American Public University System] at 05:35 11 February 2014 


--- Page 50 ---
48 INTELLIGENCE AND NATIONAL SECURITY
1945 as it did between 1815 and 1914. Since 1945, armies have become
increasingly bureaucratized. In business, bureaucratization kills the
entrepreneur. In war it kills the general. Clausewitz wrote about the
characteristics and role of just one type of general, the field commander
in battle. Today the perfect general also requires other traits; he needs
to have a genius for logistics, intelligence, military diplomacy, the
management of a large planning staff and machine.63 No single com-
mander or military system may be able to develop all of these traits fully
and simultaneously - indeed, strength in one may necessarily cause
weakness in another. Thus the German Army may have been so bad at
strategy precisely because it was so good at operations, just as the
British Army lost every battle but the last. Whether those rules which
govern field command hold true for battle management is unclear, but
one thing is clear: this issue will be fundamentally affected by the nature
of intelligence in the age of the bureaucratization of war. Since 1945,
armies have massively increased their ability to acquire information, but
this has been mostly opaque in nature, requiring complex analysis to be
of use. The ability of armies to analyse such material with accuracy and
speed has not kept pace with the increase in its volume; meanwhile,
staffs have expanded in size and the quantity of their paperwork has
been multiplied by their ability to communicate in real-time.
In particular, modern command, control, communications and intelli-
gence systems have revolutionized the art of operations and the nature
of generalship. One can acquire reliable information on issues which,
for Clausewitz, were highly problematical, such as the location and
strength of one's own forces. Even mediocre intelligence services can
reduce the depth of the fog of war regarding the enemy's location and
strength. Good intelligence services can almost entirely eliminate the
fog on such issues, and even fathom the enemy's intentions before they
are executed. In Clausewitz's theory of operations, intelligence and
prolonged calculation handicapped command. In this century they have
become a prerequisite for commanders.
Meanwhile, the relation between time and space in operations has
changed. In Clausewitz's theory, and in his day, communications were
slow, the speed of movement was low and operational theaters were
relatively small. A battle could be affected by forces within just a day's
march of one's forces, or roughly 20 miles. Of course, on the intersec-
tion between the operational and strategic levels, when planning major
operations or the beginning of a campaign, one had to account for the
forces in an entire country. In this century, Teal-time communication
exists between forces scattered over millions of square miles. The
increased duration of operations in time and their expansion in space,
Downloaded by [American Public University System] at 05:35 11 February 2014 


--- Page 51 ---
CLAUSEWITZ, INTELLIGENCE, UNCERTAINTY AND COMMAND 49
combined with the greater speed of movement of military forces,
dramatically increased the size of the area from which enemy forces may
affect a battle. For Clausewitz, the area of battle and the theater of
operations overlapped in a relatively small space. The tactical and the
operational spheres were almost identical. In this century, increasingly
the tactical, operational and strategic spheres have come to overlap.
MacArthur's battles could be immediately affected by forces hundreds
of miles away, his operations by enemies based thousands of miles
away. For commanders in the 1990s, this situation has become even
more notable.
Hence, contemporary commanders may face a situation unprece-
dented in history. Intelligence and communications have improved, but
so have the speed of battle and the need for quick decisions. More
information is available more rapidly on more subjects; the one thing
which has not changed is the speed required to make human judgements
and decisions. Commanders need far more information on a far greater
range of matters than in the past. They can also acquire it. Once, most
pieces of intelligence were false; now, they are true, but trivial in quality
and overwhelming in quantity. More can be worse. Certainly, a massive
volume of accurate but opaque intelligence will produce information
overload and two opposite problems. The first is the Clausewitzian
dilemma of ignorant uncertainty, bewilderment and paralysis of the will.
The second is self-confident error, the tendency to interpret this
otherwise unmanageable mass of material solely through preconcep-
tion. The second problem renders an increased quantity of intelligence
counter-productive. Virtually any pre-conception will plausibly explain
some intelligence. Hence, an increased quantity of opaque intelligence
will support any and every mistake in assessment - volume reinforces
error. The greater the quantity of such material, the greater the amount
of intelligence any preconception will seem to explain and therefore,
intuitively, the more accurate it will seem to be.
Simultaneously, the very nature of 'uncertainty' has changed. Once it
stemmed simply from the lack of accurate knowledge; now both from
the lack of accurate knowledge and of usable knowledge. In fact,
contemporary commanders confront two distinct varieties of uncer-
tainty, which have different causes and different solutions. One of them
is as old as war, the other is the direct product of an attempt to solve the
first. 'Type A' uncertainty is that described by Clausewitz, characterized
by ignorance and the inability to receive accurate, useful and timely
intelligence in time to act on it. ''Type B' uncertainty stems from the
power of modern C3I systems, which collect anything and everything
Downloaded by [American Public University System] at 05:35 11 February 2014 


--- Page 52 ---
50 INTELLIGENCE AND NATIONAL SECURITY
that can be collected and communicate anything and everything that can
be communicated simply because it can be done. In modern war, too
much has to be known too quickly and too much can be known too
often; and by the time what can be known has been understood, new
factors become known which, again, have to be understood before one
can act, ad infmitum. Type A uncertainty was literal and perceptual: (a)
one could not know the facts and (b) one knew that fact. With Type B,
the literal problem has declined while the perceptual one has changed:
(a) sometimes one can know the facts and (b) one knows that one can do
so but (c) one cannot predict how or when one will know the facts one
wants to know or determine how to separate them in time from the mass
of irrelevant facts that surround them - or distinguish 'signals' from
'noise', to use Roberta Wohlstetter's classic terminology.64 Type B
uncertainty produces the 'Schwarzkopf syndrome', the desire to wait
just one more moment in order to read just one more report, the
reluctance to act on imperfect knowledge because it is known to be
imperfect and that at any point another report might well produce
perfection. Clausewitz offered an elegant and practical solution to Type
A uncertainty: to ignore intelligence and to act exclusively on informed
intuition, because only through this means could generals hope to deal
with the world. Neither this solution nor a simplistic application of
Clausewitz's 'imperative principle1 can appeal to commanders confront-
ing the second sort of uncertainty.
All this is affected by yet another problem. Pieces of intelligence are a
perishable commodity since their value declines over time. (See Figure
3.) Two issues define the 'half-life' of military intelligence, or the speed
with which it must be used in order to be of value: the level of war
(tactical, operational or strategic) and the fluidity of the engagement.
Generally speaking, the higher the level, the longer the half-life. There
is, however, one fundamental limit to this generalization. The central
issues at hand are the degree to which a military situation is constant and
a piece of intelligence is unique. The more continual the situation and
the more continuous the information, the longer the half-life; the less
the continuity, the shorter the period of value. The half-life of the
intelligence available to a battalion before the start of a prepared battle
may match that of a corps midway through a mobile engagement. The
tactical intelligence available to Canadian companies before the assault
on Vimy Ridge in 1917 remained useful for weeks. The operational
intelligence available to Rommel's headquarters during the 'Crusader'
operation of 1941 often had a half-life of half a day.
The rate of decline in this 'half-life' from higher to lower levels varies
directly with the fluidity of the engagement. This rate is most gradual in
Downloaded by [American Public University System] at 05:35 11 February 2014 


--- Page 53 ---
INTELLIGENCE AS A PERISHABLE COMMODITY IN WAR
ACCURACY OR
RELIABILITY
OF
INTELLIGENCE
Downloaded by [American Public University System] at 05:35 11 February 2014 


--- Page 54 ---
52 INTELLIGENCE AND NATIONAL SECURITY
set-piece battles, fought from fixed positions after days to months of
preparation. In such circumstances, much of the deployment of enemy
forces will remain stable for long periods and can easily be determined,
while one's own chain of command and flow of intelligence will remain
strong. Intelligence services will tend to function at their highest level of
efficiency, producing and cross-checking useful, reliable and accurate
intelligence. Staffs will have ample time to assess this intelligence, which
will let the highest and best organized of them guide their subordinates.
Often, neither the purport of intelligence nor the military situation will
change notably from day to day. A broad framework of things constant
and known will surround even those things which change and become
unknown. In prepared operations, finally, whether one acts on a piece
of intelligence immediately or two weeks later will as often as not be
irrelevant. In many cases, actions taken immediately will not be
completed for two weeks. In such circumstances, the half-life of tactical
intelligence will be measured in days or weeks, operational intelligence
in weeks or months, and strategic intelligence in months.
In mobile war, none of these rules holds true. The deployment of
one's forces and those of the enemy will frequently change. So will
intelligence about them. The chain of command and the flow of
information will often break; intelligence and operational authorities at
higher headquarters will not be able to guide their subordinates, which
will often have to act with little time for assessment or preparation.
Hence, in mobile war, the lower the level of the engagement, the less
the accuracy of the intelligence and the power of assessment; and yet the
greater the speed with which intelligence must be used to be of value.
Therefore, in mobile war the half-life of intelligence declines sharply;
from months at the strategic level to days at the operational and hours at
the tactical level. Intelligence has the shortest half-life of all in the
middle of a fluid engagement at the tactical sphere. Here, military
situations and military intelligence are most fleeting and unique. In such
circumstances, intelligence literally must be used within a few hours or
never at all; often one must act immediately in ignorance rather than
wait an hour for accurate information to arrive. At the operational
level, the half-life of intelligence is greater, but nowhere else does
assessment confront such technical complexity. Assessing staffs are
small while irrevocable decisions often must be made within the space of
several hours.
Each of these combinations of level and fluidity of war produces
distinct problems regarding the collection, assessment and use of
intelligence. Each of these problems has a different ideal solution. The
Downloaded by [American Public University System] at 05:35 11 February 2014 


--- Page 55 ---
CLAUSEWITZ, INTELLIGENCE, UNCERTAINTY AND COMMAND 53
lessons learned from any one need not apply to any other - in fact, they
may be precisely the solution not to apply. Thus, elaborate intelligence
organizations and careful calculation are essential for prepared opera-
tions, but counter-productive for fluid ones; similarly, experience of
tactical command in a mobile war cannot prepare one for the accuracy
and half-life of intelligence available at the strategic level.
These issues are not merely of academic significance. They are
fundamental to command decisions and military education. Mere
intellectual knowledge of them will not make good generals, but
ignorance will make bad ones. Such knowledge cannot tell generals how
they should act. It will show them the environment in which their
actions take place: it will illuminate the problem and indicate the
solutions. Perhaps commanders can be taught to recognize that the
relationship between intelligence, time, uncertainty and decision takes
different forms, each with distinct characteristics and problems. Perhaps
new rule-of-thumb solutions can be found to these problems, through
focusing on the collection of transparent intelligence, or on kinds of
opaque intelligence which cannot be explained by every kind of
preconception - by developing more effective means of formal assess-
ment or schooled intuition and by formulating a version of the art of war
resting on a higher base of knowledge. Perhaps one can define
indicators which are most likely to reveal what one needs to know at a
time that one can act on it. Perhaps a new version of the 'imperative
principle' can be formulated to help commanders know when they know
enough to act, to know when they should cease to wait for new
intelligence reports and disregard the constant flood of incoming trivia.
Perhaps the main requirement of determination will be the ability to
know that the time has come to 'stand like a rock' and move - despite
the sure knowledge that new and relevant information will arrive while
one is doing so. When one can know everything, the problem is to know
when one knows enough. The dilemma is clear. Once commanders had
to be taught to consider intelligence. Now that they have begun to do so,
they must be taught how to overrule it. Perhaps only a 'military genius'
will be able to deal with these new circumstances - but, if so, this genius
will have different characteristics from those defined by Clausewitz.
Whatever proves to be the cause in this realm, more definite
statements may be made about the effect of all these issues on prevailing
theories of strategy and generalship. In wars of the future, intelligence
just as much as uncertainty will shape what commanders will know and
how they should act. War will remain an act of violent, frightening
and dangerous competition, characterized by uncertainty of old kinds
and new; only remarkable traits of character and mind can come to
Downloaded by [American Public University System] at 05:35 11 February 2014 


--- Page 56 ---
54 INTELLIGENCE AND NATIONAL SECURITY
terms with it. Yet the nature of that uncertainty will not necessarily be
the same as in Clausewitz's time. In a world of real-time communica-
tions, an abundance of intelligence and, often enough, a reduced
number of known unknowns, the nature of the military genius will
change. In the age of military machines, the personal traits of the
commander will be less fundamental than in Clausewitz's day, although
still important. He will have to know how to deal with both types of
uncertainty. The nature of his intuition, his ability to understand
intelligence and to act will be different.
In particular, the nature of military genius varies with circumstances.
No single and universal mixture of characteristics produces this state at
all times through the ages; in some circumstances military genius is less
necessary for success in the field of battle than others; in others it may in
fact be unnecessary or counter-productive. When intelligence reduces
the reign of uncertainty, such personality characteristics as caution,
daring and determination are transformed: they enter an alloy with
knowlege, which alters many of the characteristics of the original
element. Hence, one must take care in comparing the 'Great Captains'
of this age with those of earlier epochs, because the greater degree of
knowledge available to captains has fundamentally changed the charac-
teristics which make them great. Bonaparte's determination literally is
Haig's obstinacy. Intelligence allows far more commanders to achieve
the status favored by Clausewitz, where boldness is 'governed by
superior intellect'. It also allows caution to become deliberate - to
become calculation.
All this, in turn, affects fundamental aspects of Clausewitz's theory of
war. Whereas Jomini compared war to a game of chess, Clausewitz
argued that 'in the whole range of human activities, war most closely
resembles a game of cards'.65 But which game? With what range of
chance and what room for skill and what degree of uncertainty? Vingt-
et-un? Poker? Whist? Clausewitz also saw war as an act not of reason
but of will, where intellect matters less than character. Daring and
determination were more valuable to generals than knowledge; greater
military consequences were produced by marginal changes in personal-
ity than in brain cells.66 The characteristics required of a commander
were those of an expert at poker rather than a master of chess. Yet in
the modern era war can also be an act of intelligence. When this is so,
character is no longer by necessity the only central issue, and the nature
of the metaphorical game itself has changed. The realm of chance is
changed and the room for skill increased.
Commanders are no longer playing poker, but games where the realm
of uncertainty is reduced, such as happens to different degrees in chess
Downloaded by [American Public University System] at 05:35 11 February 2014 


--- Page 57 ---
CLAUSEWITZ, INTELLIGENCE, UNCERTAINTY AND COMMAND 55
or whist. Nothing can be more fatal than to play chess or whist as though
they were poker against an opponent who plays by the rules of the
game. In particular, when intelligence lets one side play chess against
the enemy's poker, caution ceases necessarily to be the mark of the
undistinguished mind or the mere product of psychological weakness,
whereas aggressive risk-taking may well be so. Caution can cease to be
just a personality reflex. It can become a rational response to know-
ledge. A calculated chess player will have an advantage over a
aggressive one who plays the game by the rules of poker. One cannot
win at poker without bluffing; one cannot bluff at chess.
All this modifies Clausewitz's insights into the art of command. In
principle, boldness - both in his sense of the word or in the common
parlance of aggressive risk-taking - can become more common and
more successful than he predicted. Yet deliberate caution may also
become more common and even more effective than Clausewitz
predicted. To err on the side of caution is no longer necessarily to err,
for caution as well as boldness can be linked with effect to superior
intellect or to cunning. The rise of intelligence and the decline of
uncertainty in modern warfare have affected the actions of generals.
They must also affect our judgement of generalship.
NOTES
The authors are grateful to Sebastian Cox, Edward Drea, Christina Goulter, Andrew
Lambert, Tim O'Rourke and Milan Vego for comments on earlier drafts of this article,
and to Jill Handel for her editorial comments and other suggestions.
1. Carl von Clausewitz, On War (eds Michael Howard and Peter Paret, Princeton,
1976), p.233.
2. Ibid. p.117. For a discussion of many issues related to this topic, see Michael Handel,
'Intelligence and Military Operations' in Michael I. Handel (ed.), Intelligence and
Military Operations (London, 1990) and Masters of War: Sun Tzu, Clausewitz and
Jomini (London, 1992).
3. W. Kendrick Pritchett, The Greek State at War, Part III: Religion (Berkeley, CA,
1982), p.149.
4. Clausewitz, On War, pp.198-201, 210, and Handel, Military Operations, pp.8-11, 13-
21 and Masters of War, pp. 107-32.
5. For Jomini, see Handel, Masters of War, pp.107-32. For recent accounts of
Wellington and operational intelligence, cf. Jac Weller, 'Wellington's Asset: A
Remarkable Successful System of Intelligence', Military Review, 42 (June 1962); Julia
V. Page, Intelligence Officer in the Peninsula: Letters and Diaries of Major the Hon.
Edward Charles Cocks, 1786-1812 (Tunbridge Wells, 1986: introduction by David
Chandler). All modern accounts of Wellington's military organization also refer to his
intelligence system: cf. Michael Glover, Wellington's Army in the Peninsula, 1808-
1814 (Vancouver: 1977); H.C.B Rogers, Wellington's Army (London, 1979) and
Lawrence James, The Iron Duke, A Military Biography of Wellington (London,
1992). Stephen Mark Harris's MA dissertation at the Department of History,
Downloaded by [American Public University System] at 05:35 11 February 2014 


--- Page 58 ---
56 INTELLIGENCE AND NATIONAL SECURITY
University of Calgary, 1993, 'British Military Intelligence in the Crimean War, 1854-
1856', demonstrates that at their best, operational intelligence systems in the middle
nineteenth century could provide material which rivals the quality and accuracy of
their successors of the twentieth century.
6. Handel, Masters, pp. 102-7.
7. Clausewitz, On War, p. 100.
8. Ibid., p.110.
9. Ibid., p.103.
10. Ibid., p.101.
11. Ibid., p.108.
12. Ibid., pp.105-4.
13. Ibid., p.117.
14. Ibid., pp.102-3.
15. Ibid.
16. Ibid., p.102.
17. Ibid., pp.146-7.
18. Ibid., p.71.
19. Ibid., p.112.
20. Ibid., p.108. (Our italics.)
21. Ibid., pp.190, 192.
22. Ibid., p.200.
23. For arguments on these lines, cf. 'Intelligence and the Problem of Strategic Surprise',
in Michael Handel, War, Strategy and Intelligence (London, 1989), pp.229-81 and the
same author's Perception, Deception and Surprise: The Case of the Yom Kippur War
(Jerusalem, 1976); Richard K. Betts, 'Analysis, War and Decision: Why Intelligence
Failures are Inevitable", World Politics, 31 (Oct., 1978), pp.61-89, and the same
author's Surprise Attack: Lessons for Defense Planning (Washington, 1982).
24. Clausewitz, On War, pp. 110, 190-1; Azar Gat, The Origins of Military Thought, From
the Enlightenment to Von Clausewitz (Oxford, 1989), pp.202, 205.
25. Clausewitz, On War, p.192.
26. Ibid., pp.202-3.
27. Ibid., p.85.
28. Ibid., p.180. See also Handel, Masters of War, pp.151-4.
29. Ibid., pp.103, 190.
30. Ibid., p.86.
31. Michael Howard, 'The Influence of Clausewitz', pp.29-39 in Howard and Paret,
op. cit. For contemporary views about determination, character and daring similar to
those of Clausewitz cf. Marshall Marmont, The Spirit of Military Institutions (trans.
Frank Schallcr), (1974 (1864)), pp.222-37. Clauscwitz's great nineteenth-century
competitor as a theorist of strategy, the Baron de Jomini, placed far less emphasis on
the topic but his few references to the issue coincide with the views of Clausewitz. See
Baron dc Jomini, The Art of War, translated by G.H. Mcndcll and W.P. Craighill,
(Philadelphia, 1962), p.50. The Clausewitzian and Napoleonic tradition about the
psychology of command also pervades the views of one of the most representative
commentators on strategy before the First World War, Commandant J. Colin, The
Transformations of War, translated by L.H.R. Pope-Hennessey (London, 1912),
pp.183, 351-3.
32. John Keegan, 'Peace By Other Means: War, Popular Opinion and Politically
Incorrect Clausewitz'. The Times Literary Supplement, 11 Dec. 1992, pp.3-4.
33. Martin Blumenson, The Patton Papers. 1885-1940 (Boston, 1972), pp.753, 794-7 and
The Patton Papers, 1940-1945 (Boston, 1974), p.263; Alfred D. Chandler, Stephen E.
Ambrose, Joseph P. Hobbs, Edwin Alan Thompson and Elizabeth F. Smith (eds).
The Papers of Dwight David Eisenhower III: The War Years (Baltimore, 1970),
pp.1439, 1754. See also Christopher Brassford, Clausewitz in English: The Reception
of Clausewitz in Britain and America, 1815-1945 (New York, 1994), especially
pp. 152-87.
Downloaded by [American Public University System] at 05:35 11 February 2014 


--- Page 59 ---
CLAUSEWITZ, INTELLIGENCE, UNCERTAINTY AND COMMAND 57
34. John Keegan, A History of Warfare (New York, 1993), simultaneously views
Clausewitz as having had no influence while somehow still producing every evil in
modern war. Unfortunately, he fails to understand the text he attacks, describing a
Clausewitz who never lived while ignoring the one who did. Keegan's appreciation of
Clausewitz is reminiscent of the Ayatollah Khomeini's views on the United States.
35. Brian Bond, Liddell Hart: A Study of His Military Thought (London, 1977), pp.20,
45; John Mearsheimer, Liddell Hart and the Weight of History (Ithaca, 1988), pp. 48-
50; Blumenson, The Patton Papers, 1885-1940, pp.794-7.
36. For a discussion of this issue, cf. John Ferris, 'The Intelligence-Deception Complex:
An Anatomy', Intelligence and National Security, Vol.4, No.4 (October, 1989).
37. Edward Drea, MacArthur's Ultra, Codebreaking and the War Against Japan, 1942-
1945 (Kansas, 1992).
38. Gordon W. Prange, with Donald M. Goldstein and Katherine V. Dillon, At Dawn We
Slept (New York, 1981), Miracle at Midway, 1982) and Pearl Harbor, The Verdict of
History (New York, 1986).
39. Ronald Lewin, The American Magic: Codes, Ciphers and the Defeat of Japan (New
York, 1982); Henry C. Clausen with Bruce Lee, Pearl Harbor, Final Judgement,
(New York, 1992); John Costello, The Pacific War (New York, 19S1); Edwin T.
Layton, with Roger Pineau and John Costello, 'And I Was There': Pearl Harbor and
Midway - Breaking the Secrets (New York, 1985); Ladislas Farago, The Broken Seal:
'Operation Magic' and the Secret Road to Pearl Harbor (New York, 1967); James
Rusbridger and Eric Nave, Betrayal at Pearl Harbor: How Churchill Lured Roosevelt
into War (New York, 1991).
40. Ralph Bennett, Ultra in the West (London, 1979) and Ultra and Mediterranean
Strategy (New York, 1989).
41. Drea, MacArthur's Ultra, pp.28-9.
42. Cf. n. 39 and John Ferris, 'Ralph Bennett and the Study of Ultra: A Review Article',
Intelligence and National Security, Vol.6, No.2 (April, 1991).
43. Drea, MacArthur's Ultra, pp.74-5.
44. For a general discussion of allied points, cf. John Ferris, 'The British Army, Signals
and Security in the Desert Campaign, 1940-42', in Michael Handel (ed.), Intelligence
and Military Operations (London, 1990), pp.255-91.
45. Drea, MacArthur's Ultra, pp.62, 92.
46. John Ferris (ed.), The British Army and Signals Intelligence During the First World
War (Army Records Society, 1992), Chapter Eight, passim; Anthony H. Cordesman
and Abraham R. Wagner, The Lessons of Modern War, Volume II: The Iran-Iraq
War (Boulder, 1990), pp.412-23, passim.
47. Public Record Office, London, WO 208/1214, memorandum by Piggott, No.32,
30.11.37. This citation appears by permission of the Controller of Her Majesty's
Stationery Office.
48. Ralph Bennett, 'Intelligence and Strategy in World War II', in K.G. Robertson (ed.),
British and American Approaches to Intelligence (London, 1987), p. 147. For a general
discussion of these issues, see Michael Handel, 'The Politics of Intelligence' in
Handel, War, Strategy and Intelligence; Thomas L. Hughes, The Fate of Facts in the
World of Men (New York, December 1976) and Yehoshafat Harkabi, 'The Intelli-
gence Policy Maker Tangle', Jerusalem Quarterly, No.30 (Winter 1984), pp. 125-31.
49. Drea, MacArthur's Ultra, pp.187.
50. John Dower, War Without Mercy, Race and Power in the Pacific War, (New York,
1986). For a discussion of the attitudes of the British and American Armies on such
matters before the outbreak of the Pacific war, cf. John Ferris, 'Racism, Ethnocentra-
cism and Strategy: British and American Perceptions of the Imperial Japanese Army,
1919-41', a paper presented to the First International Conference on Strategy, the
United States Army War College, Carlisle Barracks, February 1990, and 'Worthy of
Some Better Enemy?: The British Estimate of the Imperial Japanese Army, 1919-41,
and the Fall of Singapore', The Canadian Journal of History, Vol.XXVIII, No.2
(August 1993).
Downloaded by [American Public University System] at 05:35 11 February 2014 


--- Page 60 ---
58 INTELLIGENCE AND NATIONAL SECURITY
51. Clausewitz, On War, p.528, 571-2; cf. Section 6, Chs.5 and 22.
52. Thomas M. Huber, Japan's Battle of Okinawa, April-June 1945, Leavenworth
Papers, Number 18 (Combat Studies Institute, United States Army Command and
General Staff College, 1990), p.11.
53. Drea, MacArthur's Ultra, pp.202-25.
54. Lewin, American Magic, pp.159-69.
55. F.H. Hinsley, 'British Intelligence in the Second World War', in Christopher Andrew
and Jeremy Noakes (eds), Intelligence and International Relations (Exeter, 1987),
pp.217-18, and F.H. Hinsley, The Intelligence Revolution: A Historical Perspective
(United States Air Force Academy, Colorado Springs, Co., The Harmon Memorial
Lecture in Military History, No.31), 1988, pp.9-10.
56. Drea, p.231.
57. Clausewitz, On War, pp.194-5, 204.
58. The best account of the Canadian Corps style of operations, and in particular the
means by which it understood and exploited the characteristics of the German
defensive system and its reliance on counterattacks in 1917-18 is Ian Brown, 'Currie
and the Canadian Corps 1917-1918' (MA dissertation, University of Calgary, 1991,
pp.34-7, 74-82, passim. For other discussions relevant to the topic, cf. G.W.L.
Nicholson, Canadian Expeditionary Force, 1914-1919 (Ottawa, 1961), pp.284-6; Tim
Travers, How the War Was Won: Command and Technology in the British Army on
the Western Front, 1917-1918 (London, 1992), pp.110-74; C.E.W. Bean, The Official
History of Australia in the War of 1914-1918, Volume V: The Australian Imperial
Force in France During the Allied Offensive, 1918, (Sydney, 1942), pp.242-626.
59. Larry I. Bland and Sharon Ritenour Stevens (eds), The Papers of George Catlett
Marshall, Volume 3: The Right Man for the Job, December 7, 1941-May 31, 1943,
(1991), pp.101-2.
60. Memorandum by E.T. Williams, undated but c. 1945, 'The Use of Ultra by the
Army', WO 208-3575.
61. Handel, Masters of War, pp.148-9.
62. For evidence supporting the view that the beginning of the modern age of intelligence
was 1914 rather than 1939, see Patrick Beesley, Room 40, British Naval Intelligence,
1914-1918 (London, 1982); Ferris, The British Army, op. cit.; John Ferris, 'The
British Army and Signals intelligence in the Field During the First World War',
Intelligence and National Security, Vol.3, No.4 (October 1988) and David Kahn, The
Codebreakers: The Story of Secret Writing (New York, 1967).
63. Michael Handel, 'Clausewitz in the Age of Technology' in Michael Handel (ed),
Clausewitz and Modern Strategy (London, 1986), pp.73-5.
64. Roberta Wohlstetter, Pearl Harbor: Warning and Decision (Stanford, 1962), pp.336-
8.
65. Clausewitz, On War, p.86.
66. Gat, Military Thought, pp.181-4.
Downloaded by [American Public University System] at 05:35 11 February 2014 

